                                                                                3.1 ■ Background            105

 3.1    Background
3.1.1 The Basics of Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering
All the image processing techniques discussed in this section are implemented
in the spatial domain, which we know from the discussion in Section 2.4.2 is
simply the plane containing the pixels of an image. As noted in Section 2.6.7,
spatial domain techniques operate directly on the pixels of an image as op-
posed, for example, to the frequency domain (the topic of Chapter 4) in which
operations are performed on the Fourier transform of an image, rather than on
the image itself. As you will learn in progressing through the book, some image
processing tasks are easier or more meaningful to implement in the spatial do-
main while others are best suited for other approaches. Generally, spatial do-
main techniques are more efficient computationally and require less processing
resources to implement.
   The spatial domain processes we discuss in this chapter can be denoted by
the expression
                                g(x, y) = T[ f(x, y)]                          (3.1-1)
where f(x, y) is the input image, g(x, y) is the output image, and T is an oper-
ator on f defined over a neighborhood of point (x, y). The operator can apply
to a single image (our principal focus in this chapter) or to a set of images, such
                                                                                         Other neighborhood
as performing the pixel-by-pixel sum of a sequence of images for noise reduc-            shapes, such as digital
tion, as discussed in Section 2.6.3. Figure 3.1 shows the basic implementation           approximations to cir-
                                                                                         cles, are used sometimes,
of Eq. (3.1-1) on a single image. The point (x, y) shown is an arbitrary location        but rectangular shapes
in the image, and the small region shown containing the point is a neighbor-             are by far the most
                                                                                         prevalent because they
hood of (x, y), as explained in Section 2.6.5. Typically, the neighborhood is rec-       are much easier to imple-
tangular, centered on (x, y), and much smaller in size than the image.                   ment computationally.




               Origin                                                                    FIGURE 3.1
                                                                           y
                                                                                         A3 * 3
                                                                                         neighborhood
                                                                                         about a point
                                                          (x, y)                         (x, y) in an image
                                                                                         in the spatial
                                      3  3 neighborhood of (x, y)                       domain. The
                                                                                         neighborhood is
                                                                                         moved from pixel
                                                                                         to pixel in the
                                                                                         image to generate
                                                                                         an output image.


                            Image f
                                                          Spatial domain

                        x
106    Chapter 3 ■ Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering

                        The process that Fig. 3.1 illustrates consists of moving the origin of the neigh-
                    borhood from pixel to pixel and applying the operator T to the pixels in the
                    neighborhood to yield the output at that location.Thus, for any specific location
                    (x, y), the value of the output image g at those coordinates is equal to the result
                    of applying T to the neighborhood with origin at (x, y) in f. For example, sup-
                    pose that the neighborhood is a square of size 3 * 3, and that operator T is de-
                    fined as “compute the average intensity of the neighborhood.” Consider an
                    arbitrary location in an image, say (100, 150). Assuming that the origin of the
                    neighborhood is at its center, the result, g(100, 150), at that location is comput-
                    ed as the sum of f(100, 150) and its 8-neighbors, divided by 9 (i.e., the average
                    intensity of the pixels encompassed by the neighborhood). The origin of the
                    neighborhood is then moved to the next location and the procedure is repeated
                    to generate the next value of the output image g. Typically, the process starts at
                    the top left of the input image and proceeds pixel by pixel in a horizontal scan,
                    one row at a time. When the origin of the neighborhood is at the border of the
                    image, part of the neighborhood will reside outside the image. The procedure is
                    either to ignore the outside neighbors in the computations specified by T, or to
                    pad the image with a border of 0s or some other specified intensity values. The
                    thickness of the padded border depends on the size of the neighborhood. We
                    will return to this issue in Section 3.4.1.
                        As we discuss in detail in Section 3.4, the procedure just described is called
                    spatial filtering, in which the neighborhood, along with a predefined operation,
                    is called a spatial filter (also referred to as a spatial mask, kernel, template, or
                    window). The type of operation performed in the neighborhood determines
                    the nature of the filtering process.
                        The smallest possible neighborhood is of size 1 * 1. In this case, g depends
                    only on the value of f at a single point (x, y) and T in Eq. (3.1-1) becomes an
                    intensity (also called gray-level or mapping) transformation function of the form
                                                                  s = T(r)                                 (3.1-2)
                    where, for simplicity in notation, s and r are variables denoting, respectively,
                    the intensity of g and f at any point (x, y). For example, if T(r) has the form
                    in Fig. 3.2(a), the effect of applying the transformation to every pixel of f to
                    generate the corresponding pixels in g would be to produce an image of


a b                                s  T(r)                               s  T(r)

FIGURE 3.2
                            s0  T (r0)
Intensity
                                                                           Light
                                    Light




transformation
functions.                                  T(r)                                   T (r)
(a) Contrast-
stretching
function.
                                                                           Dark
                                    Dark




(b) Thresholding
function.                                                             r                                r
                                                   k r0                                    k
                                            Dark          Light                    Dark        Light
                                           3.2 ■ Some Basic Intensity Transformation Functions   107

higher contrast than the original by darkening the intensity levels below k
and brightening the levels above k. In this technique, sometimes called
contrast stretching (see Section 3.2.4), values of r lower than k are com-
pressed by the transformation function into a narrow range of s, toward
black. The opposite is true for values of r higher than k. Observe how an in-
tensity value r0 is mapped to obtain the corresponding value s0. In the limit-
ing case shown in Fig. 3.2(b), T(r) produces a two-level (binary) image. A
mapping of this form is called a thresholding function. Some fairly simple, yet
powerful, processing approaches can be formulated with intensity transfor-
mation functions. In this chapter, we use intensity transformations principally
for image enhancement. In Chapter 10, we use them for image segmentation.
Approaches whose results depend only on the intensity at a point sometimes
are called point processing techniques, as opposed to the neighborhood pro-
cessing techniques discussed earlier in this section.

3.1.2 About the Examples in This Chapter
Although intensity transformations and spatial filtering span a broad range of
applications, most of the examples in this chapter are applications to image
enhancement. Enhancement is the process of manipulating an image so that
the result is more suitable than the original for a specific application. The
word specific is important here because it establishes at the outset that en-
hancement techniques are problem oriented. Thus, for example, a method
that is quite useful for enhancing X-ray images may not be the best approach
for enhancing satellite images taken in the infrared band of the electromag-
netic spectrum. There is no general “theory” of image enhancement. When an
image is processed for visual interpretation, the viewer is the ultimate judge
of how well a particular method works. When dealing with machine percep-
tion, a given technique is easier to quantify. For example, in an automated
character-recognition system, the most appropriate enhancement method is
the one that results in the best recognition rate, leaving aside other consider-
ations such as computational requirements of one method over another.
   Regardless of the application or method used, however, image enhancement
is one of the most visually appealing areas of image processing. By its very na-
ture, beginners in image processing generally find enhancement applications in-
teresting and relatively simple to understand. Therefore, using examples from
image enhancement to illustrate the spatial processing methods developed in
this chapter not only saves having an extra chapter in the book dealing with
image enhancement but, more importantly, is an effective approach for intro-
ducing newcomers to the details of processing techniques in the spatial domain.
As you will see as you progress through the book, the basic material developed in
this chapter is applicable to a much broader scope than just image enhancement.

 3.2    Some Basic Intensity Transformation Functions
Intensity transformations are among the simplest of all image processing tech-
niques. The values of pixels, before and after processing, will be denoted by r
and s, respectively. As indicated in the previous section, these values are related
108     Chapter 3 ■ Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering

                       by an expression of the form s = T(r), where T is a transformation that maps a
                       pixel value r into a pixel value s. Because we are dealing with digital quantities,
                       values of a transformation function typically are stored in a one-dimensional
                       array and the mappings from r to s are implemented via table lookups. For an
                       8-bit environment, a lookup table containing the values of T will have 256 entries.
                          As an introduction to intensity transformations, consider Fig. 3.3, which
                       shows three basic types of functions used frequently for image enhance-
                       ment: linear (negative and identity transformations), logarithmic (log and
                       inverse-log transformations), and power-law (nth power and nth root trans-
                       formations). The identity function is the trivial case in which output intensi-
                       ties are identical to input intensities. It is included in the graph only for
                       completeness.

                       3.2.1 Image Negatives
                       The negative of an image with intensity levels in the range [0, L - 1] is ob-
                       tained by using the negative transformation shown in Fig. 3.3, which is given by
                       the expression

                                                                                          s = L - 1 - r                                 (3.2-1)

                       Reversing the intensity levels of an image in this manner produces the
                       equivalent of a photographic negative. This type of processing is particularly
                       suited for enhancing white or gray detail embedded in dark regions of an



FIGURE 3.3 Some                                             L1
basic intensity
transformation                                                         Negative
functions. All
curves were                                                                                                 nth root
scaled to fit in the                                        3L/4
range shown.
                                Output intensity level, s




                                                                           Log
                                                                                                                      nth power
                                                             L/2




                                                             L/4


                                                                         Identity                          Inverse log


                                                               0
                                                                   0                L/4             L/2               3L/4        L1
                                                                                           Input intensity level, r
                                          3.2 ■ Some Basic Intensity Transformation Functions      109

                                                                                    a b
                                                                                    FIGURE 3.4
                                                                                    (a) Original digital
                                                                                    mammogram.
                                                                                    (b) Negative
                                                                                    image obtained
                                                                                    using the negative
                                                                                    transformation
                                                                                    in Eq. (3.2-1).
                                                                                    (Courtesy of G.E.
                                                                                    Medical Systems.)




image, especially when the black areas are dominant in size. Figure 3.4
shows an example. The original image is a digital mammogram showing a
small lesion. In spite of the fact that the visual content is the same in both
images, note how much easier it is to analyze the breast tissue in the nega-
tive image in this particular case.

3.2.2 Log Transformations
The general form of the log transformation in Fig. 3.3 is
                               s = c log (1 + r)                          (3.2-2)
where c is a constant, and it is assumed that r Ú 0. The shape of the log curve
in Fig. 3.3 shows that this transformation maps a narrow range of low intensity
values in the input into a wider range of output levels. The opposite is true of
higher values of input levels. We use a transformation of this type to expand
the values of dark pixels in an image while compressing the higher-level val-
ues. The opposite is true of the inverse log transformation.
    Any curve having the general shape of the log functions shown in Fig. 3.3
would accomplish this spreading/compressing of intensity levels in an image,
but the power-law transformations discussed in the next section are much
more versatile for this purpose. The log function has the important character-
istic that it compresses the dynamic range of images with large variations in
pixel values. A classic illustration of an application in which pixel values have
a large dynamic range is the Fourier spectrum, which will be discussed in
Chapter 4. At the moment, we are concerned only with the image characteris-
tics of spectra. It is not unusual to encounter spectrum values that range from 0
to 10 6 or higher. While processing numbers such as these presents no problems
for a computer, image display systems generally will not be able to reproduce
110    Chapter 3 ■ Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering

a b
FIGURE 3.5
(a) Fourier
spectrum.
(b) Result of
applying the log
transformation in
Eq. (3.2-2) with
c = 1.




                    faithfully such a wide range of intensity values. The net effect is that a signifi-
                    cant degree of intensity detail can be lost in the display of a typical Fourier
                    spectrum.
                       As an illustration of log transformations, Fig. 3.5(a) shows a Fourier spec-
                    trum with values in the range 0 to 1.5 * 106. When these values are scaled lin-
                    early for display in an 8-bit system, the brightest pixels will dominate the
                    display, at the expense of lower (and just as important) values of the spec-
                    trum. The effect of this dominance is illustrated vividly by the relatively small
                    area of the image in Fig. 3.5(a) that is not perceived as black. If, instead of dis-
                    playing the values in this manner, we first apply Eq. (3.2-2) (with c = 1 in this
                    case) to the spectrum values, then the range of values of the result becomes 0
                    to 6.2, which is more manageable. Figure 3.5(b) shows the result of scaling this
                    new range linearly and displaying the spectrum in the same 8-bit display. The
                    wealth of detail visible in this image as compared to an unmodified display of
                    the spectrum is evident from these pictures. Most of the Fourier spectra seen
                    in image processing publications have been scaled in just this manner.

                    3.2.3 Power-Law (Gamma) Transformations
                    Power-law transformations have the basic form

                                                           s = c rg                             (3.2-3)

                    where c and g are positive constants. Sometimes Eq. (3.2-3) is written as
                    s = c(r + e)g to account for an offset (that is, a measurable output when the
                    input is zero). However, offsets typically are an issue of display calibration
                    and as a result they are normally ignored in Eq. (3.2-3). Plots of s versus r for
                    various values of g are shown in Fig. 3.6. As in the case of the log transforma-
                    tion, power-law curves with fractional values of g map a narrow range of dark
                    input values into a wider range of output values, with the opposite being true
                    for higher values of input levels. Unlike the log function, however, we notice
                                                                            3.2 ■ Some Basic Intensity Transformation Functions   111
                                    L1                                                                             FIGURE 3.6 Plots
                                                                                                                    of the equation
                                               g  0.04                                                             s = crg for
                                                                                                                    various values of
                                                   g  0.10
                                                                                                                    g (c = 1 in all
                                    3L/4                  g  0.20                                                  cases). All curves
                                                                                                                    were scaled to fit
        Output intensity level, s




                                                                                                                    in the range
                                                                 g  0.40
                                                                                                                    shown.
                                                                      g  0.67
                                    L/2                                     g1
                                                                                 g  1.5

                                                                                      g  2.5

                                     L/4                                                     g  5.0

                                                                                                 g  10.0

                                                                                                       g  25.0

                                       0
                                           0               L/4              L/ 2             3L/4           L1
                                                                  Input intensity level, r



here a family of possible transformation curves obtained simply by varying g.
As expected, we see in Fig. 3.6 that curves generated with values of g 7 1
have exactly the opposite effect as those generated with values of g 6 1.
Finally, we note that Eq. (3.2-3) reduces to the identity transformation when
c = g = 1.
   A variety of devices used for image capture, printing, and display respond
according to a power law. By convention, the exponent in the power-law equa-
tion is referred to as gamma [hence our use of this symbol in Eq. (3.2-3)].
The process used to correct these power-law response phenomena is called
gamma correction. For example, cathode ray tube (CRT) devices have an
intensity-to-voltage response that is a power function, with exponents vary-
ing from approximately 1.8 to 2.5. With reference to the curve for g = 2.5 in
Fig. 3.6, we see that such display systems would tend to produce images that
are darker than intended. This effect is illustrated in Fig. 3.7. Figure 3.7(a)
shows a simple intensity-ramp image input into a monitor. As expected, the
output of the monitor appears darker than the input, as Fig. 3.7(b) shows.
Gamma correction in this case is straightforward. All we need to do is pre-
process the input image before inputting it into the monitor by performing
the transformation s = r1>2.5 = r0.4. The result is shown in Fig. 3.7(c). When
input into the same monitor, this gamma-corrected input produces an out-
put that is close in appearance to the original image, as Fig. 3.7(d) shows. A
similar analysis would apply to other imaging devices such as scanners and
printers. The only difference would be the device-dependent value of
gamma (Poynton [1996]).
112    Chapter 3 ■ Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering

a b
c d
FIGURE 3.7
(a) Intensity ramp
image. (b) Image
as viewed on a
simulated monitor
with a gamma of
2.5. (c) Gamma-
corrected image.
(d) Corrected
image as viewed
on the same                 Original image   Gamma                    Original image as viewed
monitor. Compare                             correction               on monitor
(d) and (a).




                              Gamma-corrected image                  Gamma-corrected image as
                                                                     viewed on the same monitor




                        Gamma correction is important if displaying an image accurately on a
                     computer screen is of concern. Images that are not corrected properly can
                     look either bleached out, or, what is more likely, too dark. Trying to reproduce
                     colors accurately also requires some knowledge of gamma correction because
                     varying the value of gamma changes not only the intensity, but also the ratios
                     of red to green to blue in a color image. Gamma correction has become in-
                     creasingly important in the past few years, as the use of digital images for
                     commercial purposes over the Internet has increased. It is not unusual that
                     images created for a popular Web site will be viewed by millions of people,
                     the majority of whom will have different monitors and/or monitor settings.
                     Some computer systems even have partial gamma correction built in. Also,
                     current image standards do not contain the value of gamma with which an
                     image was created, thus complicating the issue further. Given these con-
                     straints, a reasonable approach when storing images in a Web site is to pre-
                     process the images with a gamma that represents an “average” of the types of
                     monitors and computer systems that one expects in the open market at any
                     given point in time.
                                         3.2 ■ Some Basic Intensity Transformation Functions    113

■ In addition to gamma correction, power-law transformations are useful for       EXAMPLE 3.1:
general-purpose contrast manipulation. Figure 3.8(a) shows a magnetic reso-       Contrast
                                                                                  enhancement
nance image (MRI) of an upper thoracic human spine with a fracture disloca-
                                                                                  using power-law
tion and spinal cord impingement. The fracture is visible near the vertical       transformations.
center of the spine, approximately one-fourth of the way down from the top of
the picture. Because the given image is predominantly dark, an expansion of
intensity levels is desirable. This can be accomplished with a power-law trans-
formation with a fractional exponent. The other images shown in the figure
were obtained by processing Fig. 3.8(a) with the power-law transformation



                                                                                  a b
                                                                                  c d
                                                                                  FIGURE 3.8
                                                                                  (a) Magnetic
                                                                                  resonance
                                                                                  image (MRI) of a
                                                                                  fractured human
                                                                                  spine.
                                                                                  (b)–(d) Results of
                                                                                  applying the
                                                                                  transformation in
                                                                                  Eq. (3.2-3) with
                                                                                  c = 1 and
                                                                                  g = 0.6, 0.4, and
                                                                                  0.3, respectively.
                                                                                  (Original image
                                                                                  courtesy of Dr.
                                                                                  David R. Pickens,
                                                                                  Department of
                                                                                  Radiology and
                                                                                  Radiological
                                                                                  Sciences,
                                                                                  Vanderbilt
                                                                                  University
                                                                                  Medical Center.)
114    Chapter 3 ■ Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering

                     function of Eq. (3.2-3). The values of gamma corresponding to images (b)
                     through (d) are 0.6, 0.4, and 0.3, respectively (the value of c was 1 in all cases).
                     We note that, as gamma decreased from 0.6 to 0.4, more detail became visible.
                     A further decrease of gamma to 0.3 enhanced a little more detail in the back-
                     ground, but began to reduce contrast to the point where the image started to
                     have a very slight “washed-out” appearance, especially in the background. By
                     comparing all results, we see that the best enhancement in terms of contrast
                     and discernable detail was obtained with g = 0.4. A value of g = 0.3 is an ap-
                     proximate limit below which contrast in this particular image would be
                     reduced to an unacceptable level.                                                 ■

EXAMPLE 3.2:         ■ Figure 3.9(a) shows the opposite problem of Fig. 3.8(a). The image to be
Another              processed now has a washed-out appearance, indicating that a compression
illustration of
                     of intensity levels is desirable. This can be accomplished with Eq. (3.2-3)
power-law
transformations.     using values of g greater than 1. The results of processing Fig. 3.9(a) with
                     g = 3.0, 4.0, and 5.0 are shown in Figs. 3.9(b) through (d). Suitable results
                     were obtained with gamma values of 3.0 and 4.0, the latter having a slightly


a b
c d
FIGURE 3.9
(a) Aerial image.
(b)–(d) Results of
applying the
transformation in
Eq. (3.2-3) with
c = 1 and
g = 3.0, 4.0, and
5.0, respectively.
(Original image
for this example
courtesy of
NASA.)
                                              3.2 ■ Some Basic Intensity Transformation Functions   115

more appealing appearance because it has higher contrast. The result obtained
with g = 5.0 has areas that are too dark, in which some detail is lost. The dark
region to the left of the main road in the upper left quadrant is an example of
such an area.                                                                  ■

3.2.4 Piecewise-Linear Transformation Functions
A complementary approach to the methods discussed in the previous three sec-
tions is to use piecewise linear functions. The principal advantage of piecewise
linear functions over the types of functions we have discussed thus far is that
the form of piecewise functions can be arbitrarily complex. In fact, as you will
see shortly, a practical implementation of some important transformations can
be formulated only as piecewise functions. The principal disadvantage of piece-
wise functions is that their specification requires considerably more user input.

Contrast stretching
One of the simplest piecewise linear functions is a contrast-stretching trans-
formation. Low-contrast images can result from poor illumination, lack of dy-
namic range in the imaging sensor, or even the wrong setting of a lens aperture
during image acquisition. Contrast stretching is a process that expands the
range of intensity levels in an image so that it spans the full intensity range of
the recording medium or display device.
   Figure 3.10(a) shows a typical transformation used for contrast stretching. The
locations of points (r1, s1) and (r2, s2) control the shape of the transformation func-
tion. If r1 = s1 and r2 = s2, the transformation is a linear function that produces no
changes in intensity levels. If r1 = r2, s1 = 0 and s2 = L - 1, the transformation
becomes a thresholding function that creates a binary image, as illustrated in
Fig. 3.2(b). Intermediate values of (r1, s1) and (r2, s2) produce various degrees of
spread in the intensity levels of the output image, thus affecting its contrast. In gen-
eral, r1 … r2 and s1 … s2 is assumed so that the function is single valued and mo-
notonically increasing. This condition preserves the order of intensity levels, thus
preventing the creation of intensity artifacts in the processed image.
   Figure 3.10(b) shows an 8-bit image with low contrast. Figure 3.10(c) shows
the result of contrast stretching, obtained by setting (r1, s1) = (rmin, 0) and
(r2, s2) = (rmax, L - 1), where rmin and rmax denote the minimum and maxi-
mum intensity levels in the image, respectively. Thus, the transformation func-
tion stretched the levels linearly from their original range to the full range
[0, L - 1]. Finally, Fig. 3.10(d) shows the result of using the thresholding func-
tion defined previously, with (r1, s1) = (m, 0) and (r2, s2) = (m, L - 1),
where m is the mean intensity level in the image. The original image on which
these results are based is a scanning electron microscope image of pollen, mag-
nified approximately 700 times.

Intensity-level slicing
Highlighting a specific range of intensities in an image often is of interest.Appli-
cations include enhancing features such as masses of water in satellite imagery
and enhancing flaws in X-ray images. The process, often called intensity-level
116     Chapter 3 ■ Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering

a b
c d
                                                         L1
FIGURE 3.10




                             Output intensity level, s
Contrast stretching.                                                                   (r2, s2)
(a) Form of                                              3L/4
transformation
function. (b) A
                                                         L/ 2                          T(r)
low-contrast image.
(c) Result of
contrast stretching.                                      L/4
(d) Result of                                                               (r1, s1)
thresholding.
(Original image                                             0
                                                                0    L/4     L/2       3L/4 L  1
courtesy of Dr.
Roger Heady,                                                        Input intensity level, r
Research School of
Biological Sciences,
Australian National
University,
Canberra,
Australia.)




                         slicing, can be implemented in several ways, but most are variations of two basic
                         themes. One approach is to display in one value (say, white) all the values in the
                         range of interest and in another (say, black) all other intensities. This transfor-
                         mation, shown in Fig. 3.11(a), produces a binary image. The second approach,
                         based on the transformation in Fig. 3.11(b), brightens (or darkens) the desired
                         range of intensities but leaves all other intensity levels in the image unchanged.

a b                      L1                                                                            L1

FIGURE 3.11 (a) This
transformation
highlights intensity
range [A, B] and
reduces all other
                             s                                                                            s               T (r)
intensities to a lower                                                                    T(r)
level. (b) This
transformation
highlights range
[A, B] and preserves
all other intensity
levels.                                                                                             r                               r
                                                 0                    A           B               L1         0   A   B           L1
                                              3.2 ■ Some Basic Intensity Transformation Functions         117

■ Figure 3.12(a) is an aortic angiogram near the kidney area (see Section                  EXAMPLE 3.3:
1.3.2 for a more detailed explanation of this image). The objective of this ex-            Intensity-level
                                                                                           slicing.
ample is to use intensity-level slicing to highlight the major blood vessels that
appear brighter as a result of an injected contrast medium. Figure 3.12(b)
shows the result of using a transformation of the form in Fig. 3.11(a), with the
selected band near the top of the scale, because the range of interest is brighter
than the background. The net result of this transformation is that the blood
vessel and parts of the kidneys appear white, while all other intensities are
black. This type of enhancement produces a binary image and is useful for
studying the shape of the flow of the contrast medium (to detect blockages, for
example).
   If, on the other hand, interest lies in the actual intensity values of the region
of interest, we can use the transformation in Fig. 3.11(b). Figure 3.12(c) shows
the result of using such a transformation in which a band of intensities in the
mid-gray region around the mean intensity was set to black, while all other in-
tensities were left unchanged. Here, we see that the gray-level tonality of the
major blood vessels and part of the kidney area were left intact. Such a result
might be useful when interest lies in measuring the actual flow of the contrast
medium as a function of time in a series of images.                                ■

Bit-plane slicing
Pixels are digital numbers composed of bits. For example, the intensity of each
pixel in a 256-level gray-scale image is composed of 8 bits (i.e., one byte). In-
stead of highlighting intensity-level ranges, we could highlight the contribution




a b c
FIGURE 3.12 (a) Aortic angiogram. (b) Result of using a slicing transformation of the type illustrated in Fig.
3.11(a), with the range of intensities of interest selected in the upper end of the gray scale. (c) Result of
using the transformation in Fig. 3.11(b), with the selected area set to black, so that grays in the area of the
blood vessels and kidneys were preserved. (Original image courtesy of Dr. Thomas R. Gest, University of
Michigan Medical School.)
118     Chapter 3 ■ Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering

FIGURE 3.13                One 8-bit byte                                                  Bit plane 8
Bit-plane                                                                                  (most significant)
representation of
an 8-bit image.


                                                                                           Bit plane 1
                                                                                           (least significant)




                      made to total image appearance by specific bits. As Fig. 3.13 illustrates, an 8-bit
                      image may be considered as being composed of eight 1-bit planes, with plane 1
                      containing the lowest-order bit of all pixels in the image and plane 8 all the
                      highest-order bits.
                         Figure 3.14(a) shows an 8-bit gray-scale image and Figs. 3.14(b) through (i)
                      are its eight 1-bit planes, with Fig. 3.14(b) corresponding to the lowest-order bit.
                      Observe that the four higher-order bit planes, especially the last two, contain a
                      significant amount of the visually significant data. The lower-order planes con-
                      tribute to more subtle intensity details in the image. The original image has a
                      gray border whose intensity is 194. Notice that the corresponding borders of some
                      of the bit planes are black (0), while others are white (1). To see why, consider a




a b c
d e f
g h i
FIGURE 3.14 (a) An 8-bit gray-scale image of size 500 * 1192 pixels. (b) through (i) Bit planes 1 through 8,
with bit plane 1 corresponding to the least significant bit. Each bit plane is a binary image.
                                               3.2 ■ Some Basic Intensity Transformation Functions         119

pixel in, say, the middle of the lower border of Fig. 3.14(a). The corresponding
pixels in the bit planes, starting with the highest-order plane, have values 1 1 0 0
0 0 1 0, which is the binary representation of decimal 194. The value of any pixel
in the original image can be similarly reconstructed from its corresponding
binary-valued pixels in the bit planes.
   In terms of intensity transformation functions, it is not difficult to show that
the binary image for the 8th bit plane of an 8-bit image can be obtained by
processing the input image with a thresholding intensity transformation func-
tion that maps all intensities between 0 and 127 to 0 and maps all levels be-
tween 128 and 255 to 1. The binary image in Fig. 3.14(i) was obtained in just
this manner. It is left as an exercise (Problem 3.4) to obtain the intensity trans-
formation functions for generating the other bit planes.
   Decomposing an image into its bit planes is useful for analyzing the rela-
tive importance of each bit in the image, a process that aids in determining
the adequacy of the number of bits used to quantize the image. Also, this type
of decomposition is useful for image compression (the topic of Chapter 8), in
which fewer than all planes are used in reconstructing an image. For example,
Fig. 3.15(a) shows an image reconstructed using bit planes 8 and 7. The recon-
struction is done by multiplying the pixels of the nth plane by the constant
2n - 1. This is nothing more than converting the nth significant binary bit to
decimal. Each plane used is multiplied by the corresponding constant, and all
planes used are added to obtain the gray scale image. Thus, to obtain
Fig. 3.15(a), we multiplied bit plane 8 by 128, bit plane 7 by 64, and added the
two planes. Although the main features of the original image were restored,
the reconstructed image appears flat, especially in the background. This is not
surprising because two planes can produce only four distinct intensity levels.
Adding plane 6 to the reconstruction helped the situation, as Fig. 3.15(b)
shows. Note that the background of this image has perceptible false contour-
ing. This effect is reduced significantly by adding the 5th plane to the recon-
struction, as Fig. 3.15(c) illustrates. Using more planes in the reconstruction
would not contribute significantly to the appearance of this image. Thus, we
conclude that storing the four highest-order bit planes would allow us to re-
construct the original image in acceptable detail. Storing these four planes in-
stead of the original image requires 50% less storage (ignoring memory
architecture issues).




a b c
FIGURE 3.15 Images reconstructed using (a) bit planes 8 and 7; (b) bit planes 8, 7, and 6; and (c) bit planes 8,
7, 6, and 5. Compare (c) with Fig. 3.14(a).
120       Chapter 3 ■ Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering


                              3.3    Histogram Processing
                             The histogram of a digital image with intensity levels in the range [0, L - 1]
                             is a discrete function h(rk) = nk, where rk is the kth intensity value and nk is
                             the number of pixels in the image with intensity rk. It is common practice to
                             normalize a histogram by dividing each of its components by the total num-
                             ber of pixels in the image, denoted by the product MN, where, as usual, M
                             and N are the row and column dimensions of the image. Thus, a normalized
                             histogram is given by p(rk) = rk >MN, for k = 0, 1, 2, Á , L - 1. Loosely
                             speaking, p(rk) is an estimate of the probability of occurrence of intensity
                             level rk in an image. The sum of all components of a normalized histogram is
Consult the book Web         equal to 1.
site for a review of basic       Histograms are the basis for numerous spatial domain processing tech-
probability theory.
                             niques. Histogram manipulation can be used for image enhancement, as
                             shown in this section. In addition to providing useful image statistics, we shall
                             see in subsequent chapters that the information inherent in histograms also is
                             quite useful in other image processing applications, such as image compression
                             and segmentation. Histograms are simple to calculate in software and also
                             lend themselves to economic hardware implementations, thus making them a
                             popular tool for real-time image processing.
                                 As an introduction to histogram processing for intensity transformations,
                             consider Fig. 3.16, which is the pollen image of Fig. 3.10 shown in four basic in-
                             tensity characteristics: dark, light, low contrast, and high contrast. The right
                             side of the figure shows the histograms corresponding to these images. The
                             horizontal axis of each histogram plot corresponds to intensity values, rk. The
                             vertical axis corresponds to values of h(rk) = nk or p(rk) = nk>MN if the val-
                             ues are normalized. Thus, histograms may be viewed graphically simply as
                             plots of h(rk) = nk versus rk or p(rk) = nk>MN versus rk.
                                 We note in the dark image that the components of the histogram are con-
                             centrated on the low (dark) side of the intensity scale. Similarly, the compo-
                             nents of the histogram of the light image are biased toward the high side of
                             the scale. An image with low contrast has a narrow histogram located typi-
                             cally toward the middle of the intensity scale. For a monochrome image this
                             implies a dull, washed-out gray look. Finally, we see that the components of
                             the histogram in the high-contrast image cover a wide range of the intensity
                             scale and, further, that the distribution of pixels is not too far from uniform,
                             with very few vertical lines being much higher than the others. Intuitively, it
                             is reasonable to conclude that an image whose pixels tend to occupy the entire
                             range of possible intensity levels and, in addition, tend to be distributed uni-
                             formly, will have an appearance of high contrast and will exhibit a large vari-
                             ety of gray tones. The net effect will be an image that shows a great deal of
                             gray-level detail and has high dynamic range. It will be shown shortly that it
                             is possible to develop a transformation function that can automatically
                             achieve this effect, based only on information available in the histogram of
                             the input image.
                                                              3.3 ■ Histogram Processing   121


                                                Histogram of dark image




                                                Histogram of light image




                                         Histogram of low-contrast image




                                        Histogram of high-contrast image




FIGURE 3.16 Four basic image types: dark, light, low contrast, high
contrast, and their corresponding histograms.
122     Chapter 3 ■ Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering

                      3.3.1 Histogram Equalization
                      Consider for a moment continuous intensity values and let the variable r de-
                      note the intensities of an image to be processed. As usual, we assume that r is
                      in the range [0, L - 1], with r = 0 representing black and r = L - 1 repre-
                      senting white. For r satisfying these conditions, we focus attention on transfor-
                      mations (intensity mappings) of the form
                                                        s = T(r)        0 … r … L - 1                                   (3.3-1)
                      that produce an output intensity level s for every pixel in the input image hav-
                      ing intensity r. We assume that:
                      (a) T(r) is a monotonically† increasing function in the interval 0 … r … L - 1;
                          and
                      (b) 0 … T(r) … L - 1 for 0 … r … L - 1.
                      In some formulations to be discussed later, we use the inverse
                                                       r = T -1(s)        0 … s … L - 1                                 (3.3-2)
                      in which case we change condition (a) to
                      (a ¿ ) T(r) is a strictly monotonically increasing function in the interval
                             0 … r … L - 1.
                         The requirement in condition (a) that T(r) be monotonically increasing
                      guarantees that output intensity values will never be less than corresponding
                      input values, thus preventing artifacts created by reversals of intensity. Condi-
                      tion (b) guarantees that the range of output intensities is the same as the
                      input. Finally, condition (a ¿ ) guarantees that the mappings from s back to r
                      will be one-to-one, thus preventing ambiguities. Figure 3.17(a) shows a function



a b                              T(r)                                            T (r)
FIGURE 3.17
(a) Monotonically           L1                                               L1
increasing
                          Single
function, showing         value, sk
how multiple                                                                                 T (r)
                                               T(r)
values can map to
a single value.           Single                                                 sk
(b) Strictly              value, sq
monotonically
increasing                                       ...
function. This is a
one-to-one
                                                                          r                                               r
mapping, both                                                                         0              rk      L1
ways.                                 0      Multiple Single L  1
                                             values   value

                      †
                      Recall that a function T(r) is monotonically increasing if T(r2) Ú T(r1) for r2 7 r1. T(r) is a strictly mo-
                      notonically increasing function if T(r2) 7 T(r1) for r2 7 r1. Similar definitions apply to monotonically
                      decreasing functions.
                                                                   3.3 ■ Histogram Processing   123

that satisfies conditions (a) and (b). Here, we see that it is possible for multi-
ple values to map to a single value and still satisfy these two conditions. That
is, a monotonic transformation function performs a one-to-one or many-to-
one mapping. This is perfectly fine when mapping from r to s. However,
Fig. 3.17(a) presents a problem if we wanted to recover the values of r unique-
ly from the mapped values (inverse mapping can be visualized by reversing
the direction of the arrows). This would be possible for the inverse mapping
of sk in Fig. 3.17(a), but the inverse mapping of sq is a range of values, which,
of course, prevents us in general from recovering the original value of r that
resulted in sq. As Fig. 3.17(b) shows, requiring that T(r) be strictly monotonic
guarantees that the inverse mappings will be single valued (i.e., the mapping
is one-to-one in both directions). This is a theoretical requirement that allows
us to derive some important histogram processing techniques later in this
chapter. Because in practice we deal with integer intensity values, we are
forced to round all results to their nearest integer values. Therefore, when
strict monotonicity is not satisfied, we address the problem of a nonunique in-
verse transformation by looking for the closest integer matches. Example 3.8
gives an illustration of this.
    The intensity levels in an image may be viewed as random variables in the
interval [0, L - 1]. A fundamental descriptor of a random variable is its prob-
ability density function (PDF). Let pr (r) and ps (s) denote the PDFs of r and s,
respectively, where the subscripts on p are used to indicate that pr and ps are
different functions in general. A fundamental result from basic probability
theory is that if pr(r) and T(r) are known, and T(r) is continuous and differen-
tiable over the range of values of interest, then the PDF of the transformed
(mapped) variable s can be obtained using the simple formula

                               ps (s) = pr(r) `      `
                                                  dr
                                                                           (3.3-3)
                                                  ds

Thus, we see that the PDF of the output intensity variable, s, is determined by
the PDF of the input intensities and the transformation function used [recall
that r and s are related by T(r)].
   A transformation function of particular importance in image processing has
the form
                                                   r
                       s = T(r) = (L - 1)           pr (w) dw              (3.3-4)
                                             L0
where w is a dummy variable of integration. The right side of this equation is
recognized as the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of random variable
r. Because PDFs always are positive, and recalling that the integral of a func-
tion is the area under the function, it follows that the transformation function
of Eq. (3.3-4) satisfies condition (a) because the area under the function can-
not decrease as r increases. When the upper limit in this equation is
r = (L - 1), the integral evaluates to 1 (the area under a PDF curve always
is 1), so the maximum value of s is (L - 1) and condition (b) is satisfied also.
124   Chapter 3 ■ Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering

                      To find the ps(s) corresponding to the transformation just discussed, we use
                   Eq. (3.3-3). We know from Leibniz’s rule in basic calculus that the derivative of
                   a definite integral with respect to its upper limit is the integrand evaluated at
                   the limit. That is,

                                            ds   dT(r)
                                               =
                                            dr    dr
                                                                        r
                                                                d
                                                = (L - 1)         B p (w) dw R                         (3.3-5)
                                                                dr L0 r

                                                = (L - 1)pr(r)

                   Substituting this result for dr> ds in Eq. (3.3-3), and keeping in mind that all
                   probability values are positive, yields


                                          ps (s) = pr (r) `      `
                                                              dr
                                                              ds


                                                 = pr(r) `                  `
                                                                   1
                                                                                                       (3.3-6)
                                                              (L - 1)pr (r)

                                                       1
                                                 =                   0 … s … L - 1
                                                     L - 1
                   We recognize the form of ps (s) in the last line of this equation as a uniform
                   probability density function. Simply stated, we have demonstrated that per-
                   forming the intensity transformation in Eq. (3.3-4) yields a random variable, s,
                   characterized by a uniform PDF. It is important to note from this equation that
                   T(r) depends on pr (r) but, as Eq. (3.3-6) shows, the resulting ps (s) always is
                   uniform, independently of the form of pr(r). Figure 3.18 illustrates these
                   concepts.

                     pr (r)                                                 ps (s)

                     A
                                                      Eq. (3.3-4)
                                                                        1
                                                                       L1



                                                        r                                                   s
                         0                       L1                          0                      L1

                     a b
                     FIGURE 3.18 (a) An arbitrary PDF. (b) Result of applying the transformation in
                     Eq. (3.3-4) to all intensity levels, r. The resulting intensities, s, have a uniform PDF,
                     independently of the form of the PDF of the r’s.
                                                                                              3.3 ■ Histogram Processing       125

■ To fix ideas, consider the following simple example. Suppose that the (con-                                    EXAMPLE 3.4:
tinuous) intensity values in an image have the PDF                                                               Illustration of
                                                                                                                 Eqs. (3.3-4) and
                                       2r                                                                        (3.3-6).
                                                             for 0 … r … L - 1
                          pr(r) = c (L - 1)2
                                    0                        otherwise
From Eq. (3.3-4),
                                               r                                 r
                                                                   2              r2
             s = T(r) = (L - 1)                    pr (w) dw =            w dw =
                                          L0                     L - 1 L0        L - 1
Suppose next that we form a new image with intensities, s, obtained using
this transformation; that is, the s values are formed by squaring the corre-
sponding intensity values of the input image and dividing them by (L - 1).
For example, consider an image in which L = 10, and suppose that a pixel
in an arbitrary location (x, y) in the input image has intensity r = 3. Then
the pixel in that location in the new image is s = T(r) = r 2>9 = 1. We can
verify that the PDF of the intensities in the new image is uniform simply by
substituting pr(r) into Eq. (3.3-6) and using the fact that s = r 2>(L - 1);
that is,
                                                                                     -1

                            ps(s) = pr(r) `    ` =          `B R                          `
                                            dr        2r      ds
                                            ds            2   dr
                                                   (L - 1)


                                               `                             `
                                                                        -1
                                          2r       d r2
                                     =           B       R
                                       (L - 1)2 dr L - 1


                                                 2 `         ` =
                                            2r       (L - 1)       1
                                     =
                                         (L - 1)       2 r       L - 1
where the last step follows from the fact that r is nonnegative and we assume
that L 7 1. As expected, the result is a uniform PDF.                       ■

   For discrete values, we deal with probabilities (histogram values) and sum-
mations instead of probability density functions and integrals.† As mentioned
earlier, the probability of occurrence of intensity level rk in a digital image is
approximated by
                                         nk
                             pr(rk) =                   k = 0, 1, 2, Á , L - 1                       (3.3-7)
                                         MN
where MN is the total number of pixels in the image, nk is the number of pix-
els that have intensity rk, and L is the number of possible intensity levels in the
image (e.g., 256 for an 8-bit image). As noted in the beginning of this section, a
plot of pr(rk) versus rk is commonly referred to as a histogram.

†
    The conditions of monotonicity stated earlier apply also in the discrete case. We simply restrict the val-
    ues of the variables to be discrete.
126    Chapter 3 ■ Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering

                       The discrete form of the transformation in Eq. (3.3-4) is
                                                                  k
                                       sk = T(rk) = (L - 1) a pr(rj)
                                                                  j=0
                                                                                               (3.3-8)
                                           (L - 1) k
                                             MN ja
                                         =            nj              k = 0, 1, 2, Á , L - 1
                                                   =0

                    Thus, a processed (output) image is obtained by mapping each pixel in the
                    input image with intensity rk into a corresponding pixel with level sk in the
                    output image, using Eq. (3.3-8). The transformation (mapping) T(rk) in this
                    equation is called a histogram equalization or histogram linearization trans-
                    formation. It is not difficult to show (Problem 3.10) that this transformation
                    satisfies conditions (a) and (b) stated previously in this section.

EXAMPLE 3.5:        ■ Before continuing, it will be helpful to work through a simple example.
A simple            Suppose that a 3-bit image (L = 8) of size 64 * 64 pixels (MN = 4096) has
illustration of
                    the intensity distribution shown in Table 3.1, where the intensity levels are in-
histogram
equalization.       tegers in the range [0, L - 1] = [0, 7].
                       The histogram of our hypothetical image is sketched in Fig. 3.19(a). Values
                    of the histogram equalization transformation function are obtained using
                    Eq. (3.3-8). For instance,
                                                            0
                                        s0 = T(r0) = 7 a pr(rj) = 7pr (r0) = 1.33
                                                           j=0

                    Similarly,
                                                      1
                                   s1 = T(r1) = 7 a pr (rj) = 7pr (r0) + 7pr(r1) = 3.08
                                                     j=0

                    and s2 = 4.55, s3 = 5.67, s4 = 6.23, s5 = 6.65, s6 = 6.86, s7 = 7.00. This trans-
                    formation function has the staircase shape shown in Fig. 3.19(b).



                                                                      pr(rk) = nk>MN
TABLE 3.1
                                              rk            nk
Intensity
distribution and                            r0 = 0          790            0.19
histogram values                            r1 = 1         1023            0.25
for a 3-bit,                                r2 = 2          850            0.21
64 * 64 digital                             r3 = 3          656            0.16
image.                                      r4 = 4          329            0.08
                                            r5 = 5          245            0.06
                                            r6 = 6          122            0.03
                                            r7 = 7           81            0.02
                                                                                                  3.3 ■ Histogram Processing            127

    pr (rk)                                          sk                                      ps (sk)

   .25                                         7.0                                          .25
   .20                                         5.6                                          .20
   .15                                         4.2                                          .15
                                                                       T(r)
   .10                                         2.8                                          .10
   .05                                         1.4                                          .05
                                          rk                                           rk                                          sk
         0    1   2   3   4   5   6   7              0    1   2    3   4   5   6   7              0    1   2   3   4   5   6   7

   a b c
   FIGURE 3.19 Illustration of histogram equalization of a 3-bit (8 intensity levels) image. (a) Original
   histogram. (b) Transformation function. (c) Equalized histogram.


   At this point, the s values still have fractions because they were generated
by summing probability values, so we round them to the nearest integer:

                              s0 = 1.33 : 1                       s4 = 6.23 : 6
                              s1 = 3.08 : 3                       s5 = 6.65 : 7
                              s2 = 4.55 : 5                       s6 = 6.86 : 7
                              s3 = 5.67 : 6                       s7 = 7.00 : 7

These are the values of the equalized histogram. Observe that there are only
five distinct intensity levels. Because r0 = 0 was mapped to s0 = 1, there are
790 pixels in the histogram equalized image with this value (see Table 3.1).
Also, there are in this image 1023 pixels with a value of s1 = 3 and 850 pixels
with a value of s2 = 5. However both r3 and r4 were mapped to the same
value, 6, so there are (656 + 329) = 985 pixels in the equalized image with this
value. Similarly, there are (245 + 122 + 81) = 448 pixels with a value of 7 in
the histogram equalized image. Dividing these numbers by MN = 4096 yielded
the equalized histogram in Fig. 3.19(c).
   Because a histogram is an approximation to a PDF, and no new allowed in-
tensity levels are created in the process, perfectly flat histograms are rare in
practical applications of histogram equalization. Thus, unlike its continuous
counterpart, it cannot be proved (in general) that discrete histogram equaliza-
tion results in a uniform histogram. However, as you will see shortly, using Eq.
(3.3-8) has the general tendency to spread the histogram of the input image so
that the intensity levels of the equalized image span a wider range of the in-
tensity scale. The net result is contrast enhancement.                         ■

    We discussed earlier in this section the many advantages of having intensity
values that cover the entire gray scale. In addition to producing intensities that
have this tendency, the method just derived has the additional advantage that
it is fully “automatic.” In other words, given an image, the process of histogram
equalization consists simply of implementing Eq. (3.3-8), which is based on in-
formation that can be extracted directly from the given image, without the
128   Chapter 3 ■ Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering

                   need for further parameter specifications. We note also the simplicity of the
                   computations required to implement the technique.
                     The inverse transformation from s back to r is denoted by

                                        rk = T-1(sk)       k = 0, 1, 2, Á , L - 1               (3.3-9)

                   It can be shown (Problem 3.10) that this inverse transformation satisfies con-
                   ditions (a¿) and (b) only if none of the levels, rk, k = 0, 1, 2, Á , L - 1, are
                   missing from the input image, which in turn means that none of the components
                   of the image histogram are zero. Although the inverse transformation is not
                   used in histogram equalization, it plays a central role in the histogram-matching
                   scheme developed in the next section.

EXAMPLE 3.6:       ■ The left column in Fig. 3.20 shows the four images from Fig. 3.16, and the
Histogram          center column shows the result of performing histogram equalization on each
equalization.
                   of these images. The first three results from top to bottom show significant im-
                   provement. As expected, histogram equalization did not have much effect on
                   the fourth image because the intensities of this image already span the full in-
                   tensity scale. Figure 3.21 shows the transformation functions used to generate the
                   equalized images in Fig. 3.20. These functions were generated using Eq. (3.3-8).
                   Observe that transformation (4) has a nearly linear shape, indicating that the
                   inputs were mapped to nearly equal outputs.
                       The third column in Fig. 3.20 shows the histograms of the equalized images. It
                   is of interest to note that, while all these histograms are different, the histogram-
                   equalized images themselves are visually very similar.This is not unexpected be-
                   cause the basic difference between the images on the left column is one of
                   contrast, not content. In other words, because the images have the same con-
                   tent, the increase in contrast resulting from histogram equalization was
                   enough to render any intensity differences in the equalized images visually in-
                   distinguishable. Given the significant contrast differences between the original
                   images, this example illustrates the power of histogram equalization as an
                   adaptive contrast enhancement tool.                                                 ■

                   3.3.2 Histogram Matching (Specification)
                   As indicated in the preceding discussion, histogram equalization automati-
                   cally determines a transformation function that seeks to produce an output
                   image that has a uniform histogram. When automatic enhancement is de-
                   sired, this is a good approach because the results from this technique are
                   predictable and the method is simple to implement. We show in this section
                   that there are applications in which attempting to base enhancement on a
                   uniform histogram is not the best approach. In particular, it is useful some-
                   times to be able to specify the shape of the histogram that we wish the
                   processed image to have. The method used to generate a processed image
                   that has a specified histogram is called histogram matching or histogram
                   specification.
                                                                 3.3 ■ Histogram Processing   129




FIGURE 3.20 Left column: images from Fig. 3.16. Center column: corresponding histogram-
equalized images. Right column: histograms of the images in the center column.
130    Chapter 3 ■ Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering

FIGURE 3.21                          255
Transformation
functions for
histogram
equalization.                        192
Transformations
                                                                             (4)
(1) through (4)                                      (1)
were obtained from                   128
the histograms of                                                                        (2)
the images (from
top to bottom) in                                              (3)
the left column of                    64
Fig. 3.20 using
Eq. (3.3-8).
                                       0
                                           0        64        128                  192         255


                        Let us return for a moment to continuous intensities r and z (considered con-
                     tinuous random variables), and let pr(r) and pz (z) denote their corresponding
                     continuous probability density functions. In this notation, r and z denote the in-
                     tensity levels of the input and output (processed) images, respectively. We can
                     estimate pr(r) from the given input image, while pz (z) is the specified probabili-
                     ty density function that we wish the output image to have.
                        Let s be a random variable with the property
                                                                         r
                                               s = T(r) = (L - 1)    pr(w) dw                  (3.3-10)
                                                                  L0
                     where, as before, w is a dummy variable of integration. We recognize this expres-
                     sion as the continuous version of histogram equalization given in Eq. (3.3-4).
                        Suppose next that we define a random variable z with the property
                                                                     z
                                                G(z) = (L - 1)       pz (t) dt = s                   (3.3-11)
                                                                 3
                                                                 0

                     where t is a dummy variable of integration. It then follows from these two
                     equations that G(z) = T(r) and, therefore, that z must satisfy the condition

                                                   z = G-1[T(r)] = G-1(s)                            (3.3-12)

                     The transformation T(r) can be obtained from Eq. (3.3-10) once pr(r) has
                     been estimated from the input image. Similarly, the transformation function
                     G(z) can be obtained using Eq. (3.3-11) because pz(z) is given.
                        Equations (3.3-10) through (3.3-12) show that an image whose intensity
                     levels have a specified probability density function can be obtained from a
                     given image by using the following procedure:
                      1. Obtain pr(r) from the input image and use Eq. (3.3-10) to obtain the val-
                         ues of s.
                      2. Use the specified PDF in Eq. (3.3-11) to obtain the transformation function
                         G(z).
                                                                                3.3 ■ Histogram Processing   131

 3. Obtain the inverse transformation z = G-1(s); because z is obtained from
    s, this process is a mapping from s to z, the latter being the desired values.
 4. Obtain the output image by first equalizing the input image using Eq.
    (3.3-10); the pixel values in this image are the s values. For each pixel with
    value s in the equalized image, perform the inverse mapping z = G-1(s) to
    obtain the corresponding pixel in the output image. When all pixels have
    been thus processed, the PDF of the output image will be equal to the
    specified PDF.


■ Assuming continuous intensity values, suppose that an image has the inten-                    EXAMPLE 3.7:
sity PDF pr(r) = 2 r>(L - 1)2 for 0 … r … (L - 1) and pr(r) = 0 for other                       Histogram
                                                                                                specification.
values of r. Find the transformation function that will produce an image whose
intensity PDF is pz (z) = 3z2>(L - 1)3 for 0 … z … (L - 1) and pz (z) = 0 for
other values of z.
   First, we find the histogram equalization transformation for the interval
[0, L - 1]:
                                     r                               r
                                          2                 r2
      s = T(r) = (L - 1)    pr(w) dw =            w dw =
                         L0            (L - 1) L0        (L - 1)

By definition, this transformation is 0 for values outside the range [0, L - 1].
Squaring the values of the input intensities and dividing them by (L - 1)2 will
produce an image whose intensities, s, have a uniform PDF because this is a
histogram-equalization transformation, as discussed earlier.
   We are interested in an image with a specified histogram, so we find next
                               z                                z
                                                    3                  z3
      G(z) = (L - 1)               pz (w) dw =              w2 dw =
                          L0                     (L - 1) L0
                                                        2
                                                                    (L - 1)2

over the interval [0, L - 1]; this function is 0 elsewhere by definition. Finally,
we require that G(z) = s, but G(z) = z3>(L - 1)2; so z3>(L - 1)2 = s, and
we have

                                     z = C (L - 1)2s D
                                                         1>3



So, if we multiply every histogram equalized pixel by (L - 1)2 and raise the
product to the power 1>3, the result will be an image whose intensities, z, have
the PDF pz(z) = 3z2>(L - 1)3 in the interval [0, L - 1], as desired.
   Because s = r2>(L - 1) we can generate the z’s directly from the intensi-
ties, r, of the input image:
                                                               1/3

        z = C (L - 1) s D                                            = C (L - 1)r 2 D
                            1/3                     r2                                  1/3
                      2
                                   = B (L - 1)2           R
                                                  (L - 1)

Thus, squaring the value of each pixel in the original image, multiplying the re-
sult by (L - 1), and raising the product to the power 1>3 will yield an image
132   Chapter 3 ■ Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering

                   whose intensity levels, z, have the specified PDF. We see that the intermedi-
                   ate step of equalizing the input image can be skipped; all we need is to obtain
                   the transformation function T(r) that maps r to s. Then, the two steps can be
                   combined into a single transformation from r to z.                            ■
                      As the preceding example shows, histogram specification is straightforward
                   in principle. In practice, a common difficulty is finding meaningful analytical
                   expressions for T(r) and G-1. Fortunately, the problem is simplified signifi-
                   cantly when dealing with discrete quantities. The price paid is the same as for
                   histogram equalization, where only an approximation to the desired histogram
                   is achievable. In spite of this, however, some very useful results can be ob-
                   tained, even with crude approximations.
                      The discrete formulation of Eq. (3.3-10) is the histogram equalization trans-
                   formation in Eq. (3.3-8), which we repeat here for convenience:
                                                             k
                                    sk = T(rk) = (L - 1) a pr (rj)
                                                            j=0
                                                                                              (3.3-13)
                                                    k
                                           (L - 1)
                                             MN ja
                                       =              nj      k = 0, 1, 2, Á , L - 1
                                                   =0

                   where, as before, MN is the total number of pixels in the image, nj is the num-
                   ber of pixels that have intensity value rj, and L is the total number of possible
                   intensity levels in the image. Similarly, given a specific value of sk, the discrete
                   formulation of Eq. (3.3-11) involves computing the transformation function
                                                                     q
                                                G(zq) = (L - 1) a pz (zi)                     (3.3-14)
                                                                    i=0

                   for a value of q, so that

                                                        G(zq) = sk                            (3.3-15)
                   where pz (zi), is the ith value of the specified histogram. As before, we find the
                   desired value zq by obtaining the inverse transformation:
                                                        zq = G-1(sk)                          (3.3-16)

                   In other words, this operation gives a value of z for each value of s; thus, it per-
                   forms a mapping from s to z.
                      In practice, we do not need to compute the inverse of G. Because we deal
                   with intensity levels that are integers (e.g., 0 to 255 for an 8-bit image), it is a
                   simple matter to compute all the possible values of G using Eq. (3.3-14) for
                   q = 0, 1, 2, Á , L - 1. These values are scaled and rounded to their nearest
                   integer values spanning the range [0, L - 1]. The values are stored in a table.
                   Then, given a particular value of sk, we look for the closest match in the values
                   stored in the table. If, for example, the 64th entry in the table is the closest to
                   sk, then q = 63 (recall that we start counting at 0) and z63 is the best solution
                   to Eq. (3.3-15). Thus, the given value sk would be associated with z63 (i.e., that
                                                                     3.3 ■ Histogram Processing    133

specific value of sk would map to z63). Because the zs are intensities used
as the basis for specifying the histogram pz(z), it follows that z0 = 0,
z1 = 1, Á , zL - 1 = L - 1, so z63 would have the intensity value 63. By re-
peating this procedure, we would find the mapping of each value of sk to the
value of zq that is the closest solution to Eq. (3.3-15). These mappings are the
solution to the histogram-specification problem.
   Recalling that the sks are the values of the histogram-equalized image, we
may summarize the histogram-specification procedure as follows:

 1. Compute the histogram pr(r) of the given image, and use it to find the his-
    togram equalization transformation in Eq. (3.3-13). Round the resulting
    values, sk, to the integer range [0, L - 1].
 2. Compute all values of the transformation function G using the Eq. (3.3-14)
    for q = 0, 1, 2, Á , L - 1, where pz (zi) are the values of the specified his-
    togram. Round the values of G to integers in the range [0, L - 1]. Store
    the values of G in a table.
 3. For every value of sk, k = 0, 1, 2, Á , L - 1, use the stored values of G
    from step 2 to find the corresponding value of zq so that G(zq) is closest to
    sk and store these mappings from s to z. When more than one value of zq
    satisfies the given sk (i.e., the mapping is not unique), choose the smallest
    value by convention.
 4. Form the histogram-specified image by first histogram-equalizing the
    input image and then mapping every equalized pixel value, sk, of this
    image to the corresponding value zq in the histogram-specified image
    using the mappings found in step 3. As in the continuous case, the inter-
    mediate step of equalizing the input image is conceptual. It can be skipped
    by combining the two transformation functions, T and G-1, as Example 3.8
    shows.

As mentioned earlier, for G-1 to satisfy conditions (a¿) and (b), G has to be
strictly monotonic, which, according to Eq. (3.3-14), means that none of the val-
ues pz(zi) of the specified histogram can be zero (Problem 3.10). When working
with discrete quantities, the fact that this condition may not be satisfied is not a
serious implementation issue, as step 3 above indicates. The following example
illustrates this numerically.


■ Consider again the 64 * 64 hypothetical image from Example 3.5, whose                EXAMPLE 3.8:
histogram is repeated in Fig. 3.22(a). It is desired to transform this histogram       A simple example
                                                                                       of histogram
so that it will have the values specified in the second column of Table 3.2.
                                                                                       specification.
Figure 3.22(b) shows a sketch of this histogram.
   The first step in the procedure is to obtain the scaled histogram-equalized
values, which we did in Example 3.5:

                        s0 = 1 s2 = 5      s4 = 7   s6 = 7

                        s1 = 3 s3 = 6      s5 = 7   s7 = 7
134    Chapter 3 ■ Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering

a b                                pr (rk)                                              pz (zq)
c d
FIGURE 3.22                       .30                                                  .30
(a) Histogram of a                .25                                                  .25
3-bit image. (b)                  .20                                                  .20
Specified                         .15                                                  .15
histogram.
(c) Transformation                .10                                                  .10
function obtained                 .05                                                  .05
from the specified                                                               rk                                              zq
histogram.                              0    1    2   3    4        5   6   7                0    1   2    3     4   5   6   7
(d) Result of
                                   G (zq)                                               pz (zq)
performing
histogram
                                   7                                                   .25
specification.                     6
Compare                                                                                .20
                                   5
(b) and (d).                       4                                                   .15
                                   3                                                   .10
                                   2
                                   1                                                   .05
                                                                                 zq                                              zq
                                        0   1    2    3   4     5       6   7                0    1   2    3     4   5   6   7



                     In the next step, we compute all the values of the transformation function, G,
                     using Eq. (3.3-14):
                                                                                  0
                                                               G(z0) = 7 a pz (zj) = 0.00
                                                                                 j=0

                     Similarly,

                                            G(z1) = 7 a pz (zj) = 7 C p(z0) + p(z1) D = 0.00
                                                                1


                                                               j=0

                     and
                                                 G(z2) = 0.00               G(z4) = 2.45              G(z6) = 5.95

                                                 G(z3) = 1.05               G(z5) = 4.55              G(z7) = 7.00


TABLE 3.2
                                                                                Specified             Actual
Specified and
                                                               zq                pz (zq)              pz(zk)
actual histograms
(the values in the                                        z0 = 0                  0.00                    0.00
third column are                                          z1 = 1                  0.00                    0.00
from the                                                  z2 = 2                  0.00                    0.00
computations                                              z3 = 3                  0.15                    0.19
performed in the                                          z4 = 4                  0.20                    0.25
body of Example                                           z5 = 5                  0.30                    0.21
3.8).                                                     z6 = 6                  0.20                    0.24
                                                          z7 = 7                  0.15                    0.11
                                                                 3.3 ■ Histogram Processing      135

As in Example 3.5, these fractional values are converted to integers in our
valid range, [0, 7]. The results are:

                G(z0) = 0.00 : 0             G(z4) = 2.45 : 2
                G(z1) = 0.00 : 0             G(z5) = 4.55 : 5
                G(z2) = 0.00 : 0             G(z6) = 5.95 : 6
                G(z3) = 1.05 : 1             G(z7) = 7.00 : 7

These results are summarized in Table 3.3, and the transformation function is
sketched in Fig. 3.22(c). Observe that G is not strictly monotonic, so condition
(a¿) is violated. Therefore, we make use of the approach outlined in step 3 of
the algorithm to handle this situation.
   In the third step of the procedure, we find the smallest value of zq so that
the value G(zq) is the closest to sk. We do this for every value of sk to create
the required mappings from s to z. For example, s0 = 1, and we see that
G(z3) = 1, which is a perfect match in this case, so we have the correspon-
dence s0 : z3. That is, every pixel whose value is 1 in the histogram equalized
image would map to a pixel valued 3 (in the corresponding location) in the
histogram-specified image. Continuing in this manner, we arrive at the map-
pings in Table 3.4.
   In the final step of the procedure, we use the mappings in Table 3.4 to map
every pixel in the histogram equalized image into a corresponding pixel in the
newly created histogram-specified image. The values of the resulting his-
togram are listed in the third column of Table 3.2, and the histogram is
sketched in Fig. 3.22(d). The values of pz (zq) were obtained using the same
procedure as in Example 3.5. For instance, we see in Table 3.4 that s = 1 maps
to z = 3, and there are 790 pixels in the histogram-equalized image with a
value of 1. Therefore, pz (z3) = 790>4096 = 0.19.
   Although the final result shown in Fig. 3.22(d) does not match the specified
histogram exactly, the general trend of moving the intensities toward the high
end of the intensity scale definitely was achieved. As mentioned earlier, ob-
taining the histogram-equalized image as an intermediate step is useful for ex-
plaining the procedure, but this is not necessary. Instead, we could list the
mappings from the rs to the ss and from the ss to the zs in a three-column

                                                                                   TABLE 3.3
                                   zq      G(zq)
                                                                                   All possible
                                z0 = 0       0                                     values of the
                                z1 = 1       0                                     transformation
                                z2 = 2       0                                     function G scaled,
                                z3 = 3       1                                     rounded, and
                                z4 = 4       2                                     ordered with
                                z5 = 5       5                                     respect to z.
                                z6 = 6       6
                                z7 = 7       7
136    Chapter 3 ■ Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering

TABLE 3.4
                                                     sk                                 :         zq
Mappings of all
the values of sk                                      1                                 :         3
into corresponding                                    3                                 :         4
values of zq.                                         5                                 :         5
                                                      6                                 :         6
                                                      7                                 :         7




                     table. Then, we would use those mappings to map the original pixels directly
                     into the pixels of the histogram-specified image.                         ■


EXAMPLE 3.9:         ■ Figure 3.23(a) shows an image of the Mars moon, Phobos, taken by NASA’s
Comparison           Mars Global Surveyor. Figure 3.23(b) shows the histogram of Fig. 3.23(a). The
between
                     image is dominated by large, dark areas, resulting in a histogram characterized
histogram
equalization and     by a large concentration of pixels in the dark end of the gray scale. At first
histogram            glance, one might conclude that histogram equalization would be a good ap-
matching.            proach to enhance this image, so that details in the dark areas become more
                     visible. It is demonstrated in the following discussion that this is not so.
                        Figure 3.24(a) shows the histogram equalization transformation [Eq. (3.3-8)
                     or (3.3-13)] obtained from the histogram in Fig. 3.23(b). The most relevant
                     characteristic of this transformation function is how fast it rises from intensity
                     level 0 to a level near 190. This is caused by the large concentration of pixels in
                     the input histogram having levels near 0. When this transformation is applied
                     to the levels of the input image to obtain a histogram-equalized result, the net
                     effect is to map a very narrow interval of dark pixels into the upper end of the
                     gray scale of the output image. Because numerous pixels in the input image
                     have levels precisely in this interval, we would expect the result to be an image
                     with a light, washed-out appearance. As Fig. 3.24(b) shows, this is indeed the


a b
FIGURE 3.23
(a) Image of the
Mars moon
                                                                                       7.00
Phobos taken by
                                                          Number of pixels (  10 4)




NASA’s Mars
Global Surveyor.                                                                       5.25
(b) Histogram.
(Original image
                                                                                       3.50
courtesy of
NASA.)
                                                                                       1.75


                                                                                         0
                                                                                              0    64      128      192   255
                                                                                                        Intensity
                                                                               3.3 ■ Histogram Processing    137

                                   255                                                         a b
                                                                                               c
                                   192                                                         FIGURE 3.24
          Output intensity



                                                                                               (a) Transformation
                                                                                               function for
                                   128                                                         histogram
                                                                                               equalization.
                                                                                               (b) Histogram-
                                    64
                                                                                               equalized image
                                                                                               (note the washed-
                                     0                                                         out appearance).
                                          0   64        128        192   255                   (c) Histogram
                                                   Input intensity                             of (b).
                                   7.00
      Number of pixels (  10 4)




                                   5.25


                                   3.50


                                   1.75


                                     0
                                          0   64        128       192    255
                                                     Intensity




case. The histogram of this image is shown in Fig. 3.24(c). Note how all the in-
tensity levels are biased toward the upper one-half of the gray scale.
   Because the problem with the transformation function in Fig. 3.24(a) was
caused by a large concentration of pixels in the original image with levels near
0, a reasonable approach is to modify the histogram of that image so that it
does not have this property. Figure 3.25(a) shows a manually specified function
that preserves the general shape of the original histogram, but has a smoother
transition of levels in the dark region of the gray scale. Sampling this function
into 256 equally spaced discrete values produced the desired specified his-
togram. The transformation function G(z) obtained from this histogram using
Eq. (3.3-14) is labeled transformation (1) in Fig. 3.25(b). Similarly, the inverse
transformation G-1(s) from Eq. (3.3-16) (obtained using the step-by-step pro-
cedure discussed earlier) is labeled transformation (2) in Fig. 3.25(b). The en-
hanced image in Fig. 3.25(c) was obtained by applying transformation (2) to
the pixels of the histogram-equalized image in Fig. 3.24(b). The improvement
of the histogram-specified image over the result obtained by histogram equal-
ization is evident by comparing these two images. It is of interest to note that a
rather modest change in the original histogram was all that was required to
obtain a significant improvement in appearance. Figure 3.25(d) shows the his-
togram of Fig. 3.25(c). The most distinguishing feature of this histogram is
how its low end has shifted right toward the lighter region of the gray scale
(but not excessively so), as desired.                                            ■
138     Chapter 3 ■ Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering

a c                                                       7.00
b




                             Number of pixels (  10 4)
d
                                                          5.25
FIGURE 3.25
(a) Specified
histogram.                                                3.50
(b) Transformations.
(c) Enhanced image
                                                          1.75
using mappings
from curve (2).
(d) Histogram of (c).                                       0
                                                                 0         64        128       192          255
                                                                                  Intensity
                                                          255


                                                          192
                                 Output intensity




                                                                     (1)
                                                          128
                                                                                                      (2)
                                                           64


                                                            0
                                                                 0         64        128        192         255
                                                                                Input intensity
                                                          7.00
                             Number of pixels (  104)




                                                          5.25


                                                          3.50


                                                          1.75


                                                            0
                                                                 0         64         128      192          255
                                                                                   Intensity




                           Although it probably is obvious by now, we emphasize before leaving this
                        section that histogram specification is, for the most part, a trial-and-error
                        process. One can use guidelines learned from the problem at hand, just as we
                        did in the preceding example. At times, there may be cases in which it is possi-
                        ble to formulate what an “average” histogram should look like and use that as
                        the specified histogram. In cases such as these, histogram specification be-
                        comes a straightforward process. In general, however, there are no rules for
                        specifying histograms, and one must resort to analysis on a case-by-case basis
                        for any given enhancement task.
                                                                   3.3 ■ Histogram Processing    139

3.3.3 Local Histogram Processing
The histogram processing methods discussed in the previous two sections are
global, in the sense that pixels are modified by a transformation function
based on the intensity distribution of an entire image. Although this global ap-
proach is suitable for overall enhancement, there are cases in which it is neces-
sary to enhance details over small areas in an image. The number of pixels in
these areas may have negligible influence on the computation of a global
transformation whose shape does not necessarily guarantee the desired local
enhancement. The solution is to devise transformation functions based on the
intensity distribution in a neighborhood of every pixel in the image.
    The histogram processing techniques previously described are easily adapted
to local enhancement. The procedure is to define a neighborhood and move
its center from pixel to pixel. At each location, the histogram of the points in
the neighborhood is computed and either a histogram equalization or his-
togram specification transformation function is obtained. This function is
then used to map the intensity of the pixel centered in the neighborhood. The
center of the neighborhood region is then moved to an adjacent pixel location
and the procedure is repeated. Because only one row or column of the neigh-
borhood changes during a pixel-to-pixel translation of the neighborhood, up-
dating the histogram obtained in the previous location with the new data
introduced at each motion step is possible (Problem 3.12). This approach has
obvious advantages over repeatedly computing the histogram of all pixels in
the neighborhood region each time the region is moved one pixel location.
Another approach used sometimes to reduce computation is to utilize
nonoverlapping regions, but this method usually produces an undesirable
“blocky” effect.

■ Figure 3.26(a) shows an 8-bit, 512 * 512 image that at first glance appears        EXAMPLE 3.10:
to contain five black squares on a gray background. The image is slightly noisy,     Local histogram
                                                                                     equalization.
but the noise is imperceptible. Figure 3.26(b) shows the result of global his-
togram equalization. As often is the case with histogram equalization of
smooth, noisy regions, this image shows significant enhancement of the noise.
Aside from the noise, however, Fig. 3.26(b) does not reveal any new significant
details from the original, other than a very faint hint that the top left and bot-
tom right squares contain an object. Figure 3.26(c) was obtained using local
histogram equalization with a neighborhood of size 3 * 3. Here, we see signif-
icant detail contained within the dark squares. The intensity values of these ob-
jects were too close to the intensity of the large squares, and their sizes were
too small, to influence global histogram equalization significantly enough to
show this detail.                                                               ■

3.3.4 Using Histogram Statistics for Image Enhancement
Statistics obtained directly from an image histogram can be used for image en-
hancement. Let r denote a discrete random variable representing intensity val-
ues in the range [0, L - 1], and let p(ri) denote the normalized histogram
140       Chapter 3 ■ Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering




       a b c
      FIGURE 3.26 (a) Original image. (b) Result of global histogram equalization. (c) Result of local
      histogram equalization applied to (a), using a neighborhood of size 3 * 3.



                            component corresponding to value ri. As indicated previously, we may view
                            p(ri) as an estimate of the probability that intensity ri occurs in the image from
                            which the histogram was obtained.
                               As we discussed in Section 2.6.8, the nth moment of r about its mean is de-
                            fined as
                                                                L-1
                                                       mn(r) = a (ri - m)n p(ri)                     (3.3-17)
                                                                 i=0

We follow convention in     where m is the mean (average intensity) value of r (i.e., the average intensity
using m for the mean
value. Do not confuse it
                            of the pixels in the image):
with the same symbol                                               L-1
used to denote the num-
ber of rows in an m * n                                       m = a ri p(ri)                         (3.3-18)
neighborhood, in which                                             i=0
we also follow notational
convention.                 The second moment is particularly important:
                                                                L-1
                                                       m2(r) = a (ri - m)2 p(ri)                     (3.3-19)
                                                                 i=0

                            We recognize this expression as the intensity variance, normally denoted by s2
                            (recall that the standard deviation is the square root of the variance). Whereas
                            the mean is a measure of average intensity, the variance (or standard devia-
                            tion) is a measure of contrast in an image. Observe that all moments are com-
                            puted easily using the preceding expressions once the histogram has been
                            obtained from a given image.
                               When working with only the mean and variance, it is common practice to es-
                            timate them directly from the sample values, without computing the histogram.
                            Appropriately, these estimates are called the sample mean and sample variance.
                            They are given by the following familiar expressions from basic statistics:
                                                               1 M-1 N-1
                                                              MN xa  a f(x, y)
                                                        m =                                          (3.3-20)
                                                                  =0 y=0
                                                                    3.3 ■ Histogram Processing           141

and                                                                                   The denominator in
                                                                                      Eq. (3.3-21) is written


                                               C f(x, y) - m D
                                                                                      sometimes as MN - 1
                                 1 M-1 N-1                     2                      instead of MN. This is
                       s2 =        a     a                                (3.3-21)    done to obtain a so-
                                MN x = 0 y = 0                                        called unbiased estimate
                                                                                      of the variance. Howev-
for x = 0, 1, 2, Á , M - 1 and y = 0, 1, 2, Á , N - 1. In other words, as we          er, we are more interest-
                                                                                      ed in Eqs. (3.3-21) and
know, the mean intensity of an image can be obtained simply by summing the            (3.3-19) agreeing when
values of all its pixels and dividing the sum by the total number of pixels in the    the histogram in the lat-
                                                                                      ter equation is computed
image.A similar interpretation applies to Eq. (3.3-21).As we illustrate in the fol-   from the same image
lowing example, the results obtained using these two equations are identical to       used in Eq. (3.3-21). For
                                                                                      this we require the MN
the results obtained using Eqs. (3.3-18) and (3.3-19), provided that the histogram    term. The difference is
used in these equations is computed from the same image used in Eqs. (3.3-20)         negligible for any image
                                                                                      of practical size.
and (3.3-21).

■ Before proceeding, it will be useful to work through a simple numerical ex-         EXAMPLE 3.11:
ample to fix ideas. Consider the following 2-bit image of size 5 * 5:                 Computing
                                                                                      histogram
                                                                                      statistics.
                                   0   0     1   1   2
                                   1   2     3   0   1
                                   3   3     2   2   0
                                   2   3     1   0   0
                                   1   1     3   2   2


The pixels are represented by 2 bits; therefore, L = 4 and the intensity levels
are in the range [0, 3]. The total number of pixels is 25, so the histogram has the
components
                                6                   7
                    p(r0) =        = 0.24; p(r1) =    = 0.28;
                                25                 25

                                7                   5
                    p(r2) =        = 0.28; p(r3) =    = 0.20
                                25                 25
where the numerator in p(ri) is the number of pixels in the image with intensity
level ri. We can compute the average value of the intensities in the image using
Eq. (3.3-18):
                            3
                     m = a ri p(ri)
                           i=0

                        = (0)(0.24) + (1)(0.28) + (2)(0.28) + (3)(0.20)
                        = 1.44
Letting f(x, y) denote the preceding 5 * 5 array and using Eq. (3.3-20), we obtain
                                        1 4 4
                                       25 xa  a f(x, y)
                                 m =
                                           =0 y=0

                                    = 1.44
142   Chapter 3 ■ Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering

                   As expected, the results agree. Similarly, the result for the variance is the same
                   (1.1264) using either Eq. (3.3-19) or (3.3-21).                                  ■
                      We consider two uses of the mean and variance for enhancement purposes.
                   The global mean and variance are computed over an entire image and are use-
                   ful for gross adjustments in overall intensity and contrast. A more powerful
                   use of these parameters is in local enhancement, where the local mean and
                   variance are used as the basis for making changes that depend on image char-
                   acteristics in a neighborhood about each pixel in an image.
                      Let (x, y) denote the coordinates of any pixel in a given image, and let Sxy
                   denote a neighborhood (subimage) of specified size, centered on (x, y). The
                   mean value of the pixels in this neighborhood is given by the expression
                                                            L-1
                                                   mSxy = a ri pSxy (ri)                    (3.3-22)
                                                            i=0

                   where pSxy is the histogram of the pixels in region Sxy. This histogram has L
                   components, corresponding to the L possible intensity values in the input image.
                   However, many of the components are 0, depending on the size of Sxy. For ex-
                   ample, if the neighborhood is of size 3 * 3 and L = 256, only between 1 and 9
                   of the 256 components of the histogram of the neighborhood will be nonzero.
                   These non-zero values will correspond to the number of different intensities in
                   Sxy (the maximum number of possible different intensities in a 3 * 3 region is 9,
                   and the minimum is 1).
                      The variance of the pixels in the neighborhood similarly is given by
                                                      L-1
                                              s2Sxy = a (ri - mSxy)2 pSxy(ri)               (3.3-23)
                                                      i=0

                   As before, the local mean is a measure of average intensity in neighborhood
                   Sxy, and the local variance (or standard deviation) is a measure of intensity
                   contrast in that neighborhood. Expressions analogous to (3.3-20) and (3.3-21)
                   can be written for neighborhoods. We simply use the pixel values in the neigh-
                   borhoods in the summations and the number of pixels in the neighborhood in
                   the denominator.
                      As the following example illustrates, an important aspect of image process-
                   ing using the local mean and variance is the flexibility they afford in developing
                   simple, yet powerful enhancement techniques based on statistical measures
                   that have a close, predictable correspondence with image appearance.

EXAMPLE 3.12:      ■ Figure 3.27(a) shows an SEM (scanning electron microscope) image of a
Local enhance-     tungsten filament wrapped around a support. The filament in the center of
ment using
                   the image and its support are quite clear and easy to study. There is another
histogram
statistics.        filament structure on the right, dark side of the image, but it is almost imper-
                   ceptible, and its size and other characteristics certainly are not easily discern-
                   able. Local enhancement by contrast manipulation is an ideal approach to
                   problems such as this, in which parts of an image may contain hidden features.
                                                                     3.3 ■ Histogram Processing   143




a b c
FIGURE 3.27 (a) SEM image of a tungsten filament magnified approximately 130 *.
(b) Result of global histogram equalization. (c) Image enhanced using local histogram
statistics. (Original image courtesy of Mr. Michael Shaffer, Department of Geological
Sciences, University of Oregon, Eugene.)




   In this particular case, the problem is to enhance dark areas while leaving
the light area as unchanged as possible because it does not require enhance-
ment. We can use the concepts presented in this section to formulate an en-
hancement method that can tell the difference between dark and light and, at
the same time, is capable of enhancing only the dark areas. A measure of
whether an area is relatively light or dark at a point (x, y) is to compare the av-
erage local intensity, mSxy, to the average image intensity, called the global
mean and denoted mG. This quantity is obtained with Eq. (3.3-18) or (3.3-20)
using the entire image. Thus, we have the first element of our enhancement
scheme: We will consider the pixel at a point (x, y) as a candidate for processing
if mSxy … k0 mG, where k0 is a positive constant with value less than 1.0.
   Because we are interested in enhancing areas that have low contrast, we also
need a measure to determine whether the contrast of an area makes it a candi-
date for enhancement. We consider the pixel at a point (x, y) as a candidate for
enhancement if sSxy … k2sG, where sG is the global standard deviation
obtained using Eqs. (3.3-19) or (3.3-21) and k2 is a positive constant. The value
of this constant will be greater than 1.0 if we are interested in enhancing light
areas and less than 1.0 for dark areas.
   Finally, we need to restrict the lowest values of contrast we are willing to ac-
cept; otherwise the procedure would attempt to enhance constant areas, whose
standard deviation is zero. Thus, we also set a lower limit on the local standard
deviation by requiring that k1sG … sSxy, with k1 6 k2. A pixel at (x, y) that
meets all the conditions for local enhancement is processed simply by multi-
plying it by a specified constant, E, to increase (or decrease) the value of its in-
tensity level relative to the rest of the image. Pixels that do not meet the
enhancement conditions are not changed.
144   Chapter 3 ■ Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering

                      We summarize the preceding approach as follows. Let f(x, y) represent the
                   value of an image at any image coordinates (x, y), and let g(x, y) represent the
                   corresponding enhanced value at those coordinates. Then,

                                  E # f(x, y)   if mSxy … k0 mG AND k1sG … sSxy … k2sG
                    g(x, y) = c                                                              (3.3-24)
                                  f(x, y)       otherwise

                   for x = 0, 1, 2, Á , M - 1 and y = 0, 1, 2, Á , N - 1, where, as indicated
                   above, E, k0, k1, and k2 are specified parameters, mG is the global mean of the
                   input image, and sG is its standard deviation. Parameters mSxy and sSxy are the
                   local mean and standard deviation, respectively. As usual, M and N are the row
                   and column image dimensions.
                      Choosing the parameters in Eq. (3.3-24) generally requires a bit of experi-
                   mentation to gain familiarity with a given image or class of images. In this
                   case, the following values were selected: E = 4.0, k0 = 0.4, k1 = 0.02, and
                   k2 = 0.4. The relatively low value of 4.0 for E was chosen so that, when it was
                   multiplied by the levels in the areas being enhanced (which are dark), the re-
                   sult would still tend toward the dark end of the scale, and thus preserve the
                   general visual balance of the image. The value of k0 was chosen as less than
                   half the global mean because we can see by looking at the image that the areas
                   that require enhancement definitely are dark enough to be below half the
                   global mean. A similar analysis led to the choice of values for k1 and k2.
                   Choosing these constants is not difficult in general, but their choice definitely
                   must be guided by a logical analysis of the enhancement problem at hand. Fi-
                   nally, the size of the local area Sxy should be as small as possible in order to
                   preserve detail and keep the computational burden as low as possible. We
                   chose a region of size 3 * 3.
                      As a basis for comparison, we enhanced the image using global histogram
                   equalization. Figure 3.27(b) shows the result. The dark area was improved but
                   details still are difficult to discern, and the light areas were changed, something
                   we did not want to do. Figure 3.27(c) shows the result of using the local statis-
                   tics method explained above. In comparing this image with the original in Fig.
                   3.27(a) or the histogram equalized result in Fig. 3.27(b), we note the obvious
                   detail that has been brought out on the right side of Fig. 3.27(c). Observe, for
                   example, the clarity of the ridges in the dark filaments. It is noteworthy that
                   the light-intensity areas on the left were left nearly intact, which was one of
                   our initial objectives.                                                           ■

                     3.4    Fundamentals of Spatial Filtering
                   In this section, we introduce several basic concepts underlying the use of spa-
                   tial filters for image processing. Spatial filtering is one of the principal tools
                   used in this field for a broad spectrum of applications, so it is highly advisable
                   that you develop a solid understanding of these concepts. As mentioned at the
                   beginning of this chapter, the examples in this section deal mostly with the use
                   of spatial filters for image enhancement. Other applications of spatial filtering
                   are discussed in later chapters.
                                                                             3.4 ■ Fundamentals of Spatial Filtering                      145

   The name filter is borrowed from frequency domain processing, which is
the topic of the next chapter, where “filtering” refers to accepting (passing) or
rejecting certain frequency components. For example, a filter that passes low
frequencies is called a lowpass filter. The net effect produced by a lowpass fil-
ter is to blur (smooth) an image. We can accomplish a similar smoothing di-
rectly on the image itself by using spatial filters (also called spatial masks,
kernels, templates, and windows). In fact, as we show in Chapter 4, there is a
one-to-one correspondence between linear spatial filters and filters in the fre-                                   See Section 2.6.2
                                                                                                                   regarding linearity.
quency domain. However, spatial filters offer considerably more versatility be-
cause, as you will see later, they can be used also for nonlinear filtering,
something we cannot do in the frequency domain.

3.4.1 The Mechanics of Spatial Filtering
In Fig. 3.1, we explained briefly that a spatial filter consists of (1) a
neighborhood, (typically a small rectangle), and (2) a predefined operation that
is performed on the image pixels encompassed by the neighborhood. Filtering
creates a new pixel with coordinates equal to the coordinates of the center of
the neighborhood, and whose value is the result of the filtering operation.† A
processed (filtered) image is generated as the center of the filter visits each
pixel in the input image. If the operation performed on the image pixels is lin-
ear, then the filter is called a linear spatial filter. Otherwise, the filter is
nonlinear. We focus attention first on linear filters and then illustrate some
simple nonlinear filters. Section 5.3 contains a more comprehensive list of non-
linear filters and their application.
    Figure 3.28 illustrates the mechanics of linear spatial filtering using a 3 * 3
neighborhood. At any point (x, y) in the image, the response, g(x, y), of the fil-
ter is the sum of products of the filter coefficients and the image pixels encom-
passed by the filter:
          g(x, y) = w(-1, -1)f(x - 1, y - 1) + w(-1, 0)f(x - 1, y) + Á
                              + w(0, 0)f(x, y) + Á + w(1, 1)f(x + 1, y + 1)

Observe that the center coefficient of the filter, w(0, 0), aligns with the pixel at
location (x, y). For a mask of size m * n, we assume that m = 2a + 1 and
n = 2b + 1, where a and b are positive integers. This means that our focus in
the following discussion is on filters of odd size, with the smallest being of size                                It certainly is possible to
                                                                                                                   work with filters of even
3 * 3. In general, linear spatial filtering of an image of size M * N with a fil-                                  size or mixed even and
ter of size m * n is given by the expression:                                                                      odd sizes. However,
                                                                                                                   working with odd sizes
                                              a     b                                                              simplifies indexing and
                             g(x, y) = a a w(s, t)f(x + s, y + t)                                                  also is more intuitive
                                                                                                                   because the filters have
                                           s = -a t = -b
                                                                                                                   centers falling on integer
                                                                                                                   values.
where x and y are varied so that each pixel in w visits every pixel in f.


†
    The filtered pixel value typically is assigned to a corresponding location in a new image created to hold
    the results of filtering. It is seldom the case that filtered pixels replace the values of the corresponding
    location in the original image, as this would change the content of the image while filtering still is being
    performed.
146     Chapter 3 ■ Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering

                 Image origin
                                                                                          y




                                                        Filter mask




                                Image pixels




                                                                                  w (1, 1)      w(1, 0)      w (1, 1)
                      Image


                                                                                   w (0,1)        w (0,0)          w(0,1)
                  x



                                                                                   w (1,1)        w (1,0)          w(1,1)


                                                                                              Filter coefficients
                                    f(x  1, y  1)     f (x  1, y)   f (x  1, y  1)




                                      f(x, y  1)          f(x, y)         f(x, y  1)




                                    f (x  1, y  1)    f(x  1, y)    f (x  1, y  1)




                                                    Pixels of image
                                                    section under filter




FIGURE 3.28 The mechanics of linear spatial filtering using a 3 * 3 filter mask. The form chosen to denote
the coordinates of the filter mask coefficients simplifies writing expressions for linear filtering.

                        3.4.2 Spatial Correlation and Convolution
                        There are two closely related concepts that must be understood clearly when
                        performing linear spatial filtering. One is correlation and the other is
                        convolution. Correlation is the process of moving a filter mask over the image
                        and computing the sum of products at each location, exactly as explained in
                        the previous section. The mechanics of convolution are the same, except that
                        the filter is first rotated by 180°. The best way to explain the differences be-
                        tween the two concepts is by example. We begin with a 1-D illustration.
                           Figure 3.29(a) shows a 1-D function, f, and a filter, w, and Fig. 3.29(b) shows
                        the starting position to perform correlation. The first thing we note is that there
                                                             3.4 ■ Fundamentals of Spatial Filtering              147

                            Correlation                                 Convolution

                 Origin  f                    w              Origin   f            w rotated 180
         (a) 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0              1 2 3 2 8       0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0           8 2 3 2 1           (i)

         (b)           0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0                            0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0                       (j)
               1 2 3 2 8                                  8 2 3 2 1
                           Starting position alignment


                           Zero padding

         (c) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0              0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 (k)
             1 2 3 2 8                                    8 2 3 2 1

         (d) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0              0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 (l)
               1 2 3 2 8                                    8 2 3 2 1
                   Position after one shift

         (e) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0              0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 (m)
                     1 2 3 2 8                                    8 2 3 2 1
                           Position after four shifts

         (f) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0              0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 (n)
                                       1 2 3 2 8                                8 2 3 2 1
                        Final position

                       Full correlation result                     Full convolution result
         (g)       0 0 0 8 2 3 2 1 0 0 0 0                     0 0 0 1 2 3 2 8 0 0 0 0                 (o)


                    Cropped correlation result                   Cropped convolution result
        (h)             0 8 2 3 2 1 0 0                             0 1 2 3 2 8 0 0                    (p)

FIGURE 3.29 Illustration of 1-D correlation and convolution of a filter with a discrete unit impulse. Note that
correlation and convolution are functions of displacement.


are parts of the functions that do not overlap. The solution to this problem is to
pad f with enough 0s on either side to allow each pixel in w to visit every pixel in          Zero padding is not the
                                                                                              only option. For example,
f. If the filter is of size m, we need m - 1 0s on either side of f. Figure 3.29(c)           we could duplicate the
shows a properly padded function. The first value of correlation is the sum of                value of the first and last
                                                                                              element m - 1 times on
products of f and w for the initial position shown in Fig. 3.29(c) (the sum of                each side of f, or mirror
products is 0). This corresponds to a displacement x = 0. To obtain the second                the first and last m - 1
                                                                                              elements and use the
value of correlation, we shift w one pixel location to the right (a displacement of           mirrored values for
x = 1) and compute the sum of products. The result again is 0. In fact, the first             padding.

nonzero result is when x = 3, in which case the 8 in w overlaps the 1 in f and the
result of correlation is 8. Proceeding in this manner, we obtain the full correlation
result in Fig. 3.29(g). Note that it took 12 values of x (i.e., x = 0, 1, 2, Á , 11) to
fully slide w past f so that each pixel in w visited every pixel in f. Often, we like
to work with correlation arrays that are the same size as f, in which case we crop
the full correlation to the size of the original function, as Fig. 3.29(h) shows.
148        Chapter 3 ■ Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering

                                  There are two important points to note from the discussion in the preceding
                              paragraph. First, correlation is a function of displacement of the filter. In other
                              words, the first value of correlation corresponds to zero displacement of the
                              filter, the second corresponds to one unit displacement, and so on. The second
                              thing to notice is that correlating a filter w with a function that contains all 0s
                              and a single 1 yields a result that is a copy of w, but rotated by 180°. We call a
                              function that contains a single 1 with the rest being 0s a discrete unit impulse.
                              So we conclude that correlation of a function with a discrete unit impulse
                              yields a rotated version of the function at the location of the impulse.
                                  The concept of convolution is a cornerstone of linear system theory. As you
                              will learn in Chapter 4, a fundamental property of convolution is that convolv-
                              ing a function with a unit impulse yields a copy of the function at the location
                              of the impulse. We saw in the previous paragraph that correlation yields a copy
Note that rotation by         of the function also, but rotated by 180°. Therefore, if we pre-rotate the filter
180° is equivalent to flip-
ping the function hori-
                              and perform the same sliding sum of products operation, we should be able to
zontally.                     obtain the desired result. As the right column in Fig. 3.29 shows, this indeed is
                              the case. Thus, we see that to perform convolution all we do is rotate one func-
                              tion by 180° and perform the same operations as in correlation. As it turns out,
                              it makes no difference which of the two functions we rotate.
                                  The preceding concepts extend easily to images, as Fig. 3.30 shows. For a fil-
                              ter of size m * n, we pad the image with a minimum of m - 1 rows of 0s at
                              the top and bottom and n - 1 columns of 0s on the left and right. In this case,
                              m and n are equal to 3, so we pad f with two rows of 0s above and below and
                              two columns of 0s to the left and right, as Fig. 3.30(b) shows. Figure 3.30(c)
                              shows the initial position of the filter mask for performing correlation, and
                              Fig. 3.30(d) shows the full correlation result. Figure 3.30(e) shows the corre-
In 2-D, rotation by 180°      sponding cropped result. Note again that the result is rotated by 180°. For con-
is equivalent to flipping
the mask along one axis
                              volution, we pre-rotate the mask as before and repeat the sliding sum of
and then the other.           products just explained. Figures 3.30(f) through (h) show the result. You see
                              again that convolution of a function with an impulse copies the function at the
                              location of the impulse. It should be clear that, if the filter mask is symmetric,
                              correlation and convolution yield the same result.
                                  If, instead of containing a single 1, image f in Fig. 3.30 had contained a re-
                              gion identically equal to w, the value of the correlation function (after nor-
                              malization) would have been maximum when w was centered on that region
                              of f. Thus, as you will see in Chapter 12, correlation can be used also to find
                              matches between images.
                                  Summarizing the preceding discussion in equation form, we have that the
                              correlation of a filter w(x, y) of size m * n with an image f(x, y), denoted as
                              w(x, y)  f(x, y), is given by the equation listed at the end of the last section,
                              which we repeat here for convenience:
                                                                    a      b
                                            w(x, y)  f(x, y) = a a w(s, t)f(x + s, y + t)               (3.4-1)
                                                                  s = -a t = -b

                              This equation is evaluated for all values of the displacement variables x and y
                              so that all elements of w visit every pixel in f, where we assume that f has been
                              padded appropriately. As explained earlier, a = (m - 1)>2, b = (n - 1)>2,
                              and we assume for notational convenience that m and n are odd integers.
                                                                                3.4 ■ Fundamentals of Spatial Filtering                 149

                                           Padded f                                                                  FIGURE 3.30
                                           0 0 0 0       0 0 0 0           0                                         Correlation
                                           0 0 0 0       0 0 0 0           0                                         (middle row) and
                                           0 0 0 0       0 0 0 0           0                                         convolution (last
               Origin f(x, y)              0 0 0 0       0 0 0 0           0                                         row) of a 2-D
       0   0    0 0   0                    0 0 0 0       1 0 0 0           0                                         filter with a 2-D
       0   0    0 0   0       w(x, y)      0 0 0 0       0 0 0 0           0                                         discrete, unit
       0   0    1 0   0      1 2 3         0 0 0 0       0 0 0 0           0                                         impulse. The 0s
       0   0    0 0   0      4 5 6         0 0 0 0       0 0 0 0           0                                         are shown in gray
       0   0    0 0   0      7 8 9         0 0 0 0       0 0 0 0           0                                         to simplify visual
                     (a)                               (b)                                                           analysis.
            Initial position for w         Full correlation result             Cropped correlation result
       1   2 3 0 0 0 0 0 0                 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                 0   0 0 0 0 0
       4   5 6 0 0 0 0 0 0                 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                 0   0 9 8 7 0
       7   8 9 0 0 0 0 0 0                 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                 0   0 6 5 4 0
       0   0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                 0 0 0 9 8 7 0 0                 0   0 3 2 1 0
       0   0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0                 0 0 0 6 5 4 0 0                 0   0 0 0 0 0
       0   0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                 0 0 0 3 2 1 0 0                 0
       0   0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                 0
       0   0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                 0
       0   0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                 0
                     (c)                               (d)                          (e)
               Rotated w                   Full convolution result             Cropped convolution result
       9   8    7   0    0 0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0    0 0    0   0   0   0 0 0 0 0
       6   5    4   0    0 0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0    0 0    0   0   0   0 1 2 3 0
       3   2    1   0    0 0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0    0 0    0   0   0   0 4 5 6 0
       0   0    0   0    0 0   0   0   0   0   0   0   1    2 3    0   0   0   0 7 8 9 0
       0   0    0   0    1 0   0   0   0   0   0   0   4    5 6    0   0   0   0 0 0 0 0
       0   0    0   0    0 0   0   0   0   0   0   0   7    8 9    0   0   0
       0   0    0   0    0 0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0    0 0    0   0   0
       0   0    0   0    0 0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0    0 0    0   0   0
       0   0    0   0    0 0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0    0 0    0   0   0
                        (f)                                (g)                      (h)




  In a similar manner, the convolution of w(x, y) and f(x, y), denoted by                                            Often, when the mean-
                                                                                                                     ing is clear, we denote
w(x, y)  f(x, y),† is given by the expression                                                                       the result of correlation
                                                                                                                     or convolution by a func-
                                                       a     b                                                       tion g (x, y), instead of
                        w(x, y)  f(x, y) = a a w(s, t)f(x - s, y - t)                                   (3.4-2)     writing w(x, y)  f(x, y)
                                                   s = -a t = -b                                                     or w(x, y)  f(x, y). For
                                                                                                                     example, see the equa-
                                                                                                                     tion at the end of the
where the minus signs on the right flip f (i.e., rotate it by 180°). Flipping and                                    previous section, and
shifting f instead of w is done for notational simplicity and also to follow                                         Eq. (3.5-1).
convention. The result is the same. As with correlation, this equation is eval-
uated for all values of the displacement variables x and y so that every ele-
ment of w visits every pixel in f, which we assume has been padded
appropriately. You should expand Eq. (3.4-2) for a 3 * 3 mask and convince
yourself that the result using this equation is identical to the example in
Fig. 3.30. In practice, we frequently work with an algorithm that implements

†
    Because correlation and convolution are commutative, we                      have     that   w(x, y)  f(x, y)
    = f(x, y)  w(x, y) and w(x, y)  f(x, y) = f(x, y)  w(x, y).
150       Chapter 3 ■ Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering

                             Eq. (3.4-1). If we want to perform correlation, we input w into the algorithm;
                             for convolution, we input w rotated by 180°. The reverse is true if an algo-
                             rithm that implements Eq. (3.4-2) is available instead.
                                As mentioned earlier, convolution is a cornerstone of linear system theory.
                             As you will learn in Chapter 4, the property that the convolution of a function
                             with a unit impulse copies the function at the location of the impulse plays a
                             central role in a number of important derivations. We will revisit convolution
                             in Chapter 4 in the context of the Fourier transform and the convolution the-
                             orem. Unlike Eq. (3.4-2), however, we will be dealing with convolution of
                             functions that are of the same size. The form of the equation is the same, but
                             the limits of summation are different.
                                Using correlation or convolution to perform spatial filtering is a matter of
                             preference. In fact, because either Eq. (3.4-1) or (3.4-2) can be made to per-
                             form the function of the other by a simple rotation of the filter, what is impor-
                             tant is that the filter mask used in a given filtering task be specified in a way
                             that corresponds to the intended operation. All the linear spatial filtering re-
                             sults in this chapter are based on Eq. (3.4-1).
                                Finally, we point out that you are likely to encounter the terms,
                             convolution filter, convolution mask or convolution kernel in the image pro-
                             cessing literature. As a rule, these terms are used to denote a spatial filter,
                             and not necessarily that the filter will be used for true convolution. Similarly,
                             “convolving a mask with an image” often is used to denote the sliding, sum-
                             of-products process we just explained, and does not necessarily differentiate
                             between correlation and convolution. Rather, it is used generically to denote
                             either of the two operations. This imprecise terminology is a frequent source
                             of confusion.


                             3.4.3 Vector Representation of Linear Filtering
                             When interest lies in the characteristic response, R, of a mask either for cor-
                             relation or convolution, it is convenient sometimes to write the sum of
                             products as

                                                    R = w1 z1 + w2 z2 + Á + wmn zmn
                                                          mn
                                                       = a wk zk                                          (3.4-3)
                                                          k=1
Consult the Tutorials sec-
tion of the book Web site                              = wTz
for a brief review of vec-
tors and matrices.
                             where the ws are the coefficients of an m * n filter and the zs are the corre-
                             sponding image intensities encompassed by the filter. If we are interested in
                             using Eq. (3.4-3) for correlation, we use the mask as given. To use the same
                             equation for convolution, we simply rotate the mask by 180°, as explained in
                             the last section. It is implied that Eq. (3.4-3) holds for a particular pair of coor-
                             dinates (x, y). You will see in the next section why this notation is convenient
                             for explaining the characteristics of a given linear filter.
                                                          3.4 ■ Fundamentals of Spatial Filtering   151

                                                                                      FIGURE 3.31
                               w1         w2         w3                               Another
                                                                                      representation of
                                                                                      a general 3 * 3
                                                                                      filter mask.
                               w4         w5         w6



                               w7         w8         w9



   As an example, Fig. 3.31 shows a general 3 * 3 mask with coefficients la-
beled as above. In this case, Eq. (3.4-3) becomes
                       R = w1 z1 + w2 z2 + Á + w9 z9
                              9
                           = a wk zk                                        (3.4-4)
                             k=1
                              T
                           = w z
where w and z are 9-dimensional vectors formed from the coefficients of the
mask and the image intensities encompassed by the mask, respectively.

3.4.4 Generating Spatial Filter Masks
Generating an m * n linear spatial filter requires that we specify mn mask co-
efficients. In turn, these coefficients are selected based on what the filter is
supposed to do, keeping in mind that all we can do with linear filtering is to im-
plement a sum of products. For example, suppose that we want to replace the
pixels in an image by the average intensity of a 3 * 3 neighborhood centered
on those pixels. The average value at any location (x, y) in the image is the sum
of the nine intensity values in the 3 * 3 neighborhood centered on (x, y) di-
vided by 9. Letting zi, i = 1, 2, Á , 9, denote these intensities, the average is
                                          1 9
                                          9 ia
                                    R =         zi
                                             =1

But this is the same as Eq. (3.4-4) with coefficient values wi = 1>9. In other
words, a linear filtering operation with a 3 * 3 mask whose coefficients are 1> 9
implements the desired averaging. As we discuss in the next section, this oper-
ation results in image smoothing. We discuss in the following sections a num-
ber of other filter masks based on this basic approach.
   In some applications, we have a continuous function of two variables, and
the objective is to obtain a spatial filter mask based on that function. For ex-
ample, a Gaussian function of two variables has the basic form
                                                x2 + y2
                                  h(x, y) = e - 2s   2




where s is the standard deviation and, as usual, we assume that coordinates x
and y are integers. To generate, say, a 3 * 3 filter mask from this function, we
152   Chapter 3 ■ Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering

                   sample it about its center. Thus, w1 = h(-1, -1), w2 = h(-1, 0), Á ,
                   w9 = h(1, 1). An m * n filter mask is generated in a similar manner. Recall
                   that a 2-D Gaussian function has a bell shape, and that the standard deviation
                   controls the “tightness” of the bell.
                      Generating a nonlinear filter requires that we specify the size of a neigh-
                   borhood and the operation(s) to be performed on the image pixels contained
                   in the neighborhood. For example, recalling that the max operation is nonlin-
                   ear (see Section 2.6.2), a 5 * 5 max filter centered at an arbitrary point (x, y)
                   of an image obtains the maximum intensity value of the 25 pixels and assigns
                   that value to location (x, y) in the processed image. Nonlinear filters are quite
                   powerful, and in some applications can perform functions that are beyond the
                   capabilities of linear filters, as we show later in this chapter and in Chapter 5.

                     3.5    Smoothing Spatial Filters
                   Smoothing filters are used for blurring and for noise reduction. Blurring is
                   used in preprocessing tasks, such as removal of small details from an image
                   prior to (large) object extraction, and bridging of small gaps in lines or curves.
                   Noise reduction can be accomplished by blurring with a linear filter and also
                   by nonlinear filtering.
                   3.5.1 Smoothing Linear Filters
                   The output (response) of a smoothing, linear spatial filter is simply the average
                   of the pixels contained in the neighborhood of the filter mask. These filters
                   sometimes are called averaging filters. As mentioned in the previous section,
                   they also are referred to a lowpass filters.
                      The idea behind smoothing filters is straightforward. By replacing the value
                   of every pixel in an image by the average of the intensity levels in the neigh-
                   borhood defined by the filter mask, this process results in an image with re-
                   duced “sharp” transitions in intensities. Because random noise typically
                   consists of sharp transitions in intensity levels, the most obvious application of
                   smoothing is noise reduction. However, edges (which almost always are desir-
                   able features of an image) also are characterized by sharp intensity transitions,
                   so averaging filters have the undesirable side effect that they blur edges. An-
                   other application of this type of process includes the smoothing of false con-
                   tours that result from using an insufficient number of intensity levels, as
                   discussed in Section 2.4.3. A major use of averaging filters is in the reduction
                   of “irrelevant” detail in an image. By “irrelevant” we mean pixel regions that
                   are small with respect to the size of the filter mask. This latter application is il-
                   lustrated later in this section.
                      Figure 3.32 shows two 3 * 3 smoothing filters. Use of the first filter yields
                   the standard average of the pixels under the mask. This can best be seen by
                   substituting the coefficients of the mask into Eq. (3.4-4):
                                                              1 9
                                                              9 ia
                                                        R =         zi
                                                                 =1

                   which is the average of the intensity levels of the pixels in the 3 * 3 neighbor-
                   hood defined by the mask, as discussed earlier. Note that, instead of being 1>9,
